1. The Predominator 2. The Master of the Nativity (which is derived from the Predominator) 3. The Lord of the Nativity
These planets indicate the vital life force that is available to a person, the number of years of the life that are allotted to the native, and the spiritual agency that oversees and guides their higher purpose. The three previous rulers—the domi­ cile lords of the Ascendant and Fortune and the triplicity lords of the sect lightare rulers of the nativity insofar as they hold up and support the foundation of the chart, anchoring the factors that bring overall well-being to a flourishing and prosperous life. However, the ultimate rulers of the chart were thought to have governance over the very life force itself.
Over time, the investigation of what is perhaps life’s greatest secret—its number of years —became conflated into one planet, referred to as the Master of the Nativity (Oikodespotes geneseds). Almost every ancient author made a reference to such a planet, which was thought to have the ultimate influence over a persons longevity, character, and destiny. The astrologers search for the supreme ruler of the chart can be likened to the legendary searches for the holy grail, the elixir of life, Shangri-La, and the philosophers stone.
In their introductions concerning the Oikodespotes geneseds, Antiochus and
Porphyry (as well as others) also mentioned two other important planets that are intimately connected to the Master. One is the Predominator (Epikratetor) and the other is the Lord of the Nativity (Kurios), The procedures for identifying these planets go back to the earliest stratum of Hellenistic astrology. They were said to be derived from the work of Nechepso and Petosiris (circa first century

1036 CHAPTER 90 b ce), who elevated the Master and Lord of the Nativity above all other planets in terms of their importance in the life as a whole.1
The Predominator (Epikratëtôr) under ideal circumstances is the ruling light, either the Sun or the Moon. The Predominator is the source of the vital force that resides in the individual and signifies the animating power of life in the chart. In certain cases, the Predominator can be the Ascendant or even the Lot of Fortune, the Prenatal Lunation, or any planet. The Predominator appoints the Master. It is also used on its own for timing longevity by primary directions, and in this capacity it is called the “releaser” (or in some texts, the “prorogator”), from the Greek aphetës.
The Master of the Nativity (Oikodespotës) hosts the vital life force and dis­ tributes the years of the life. It is derived from the Predominator as one of its lords. It was used primarily in timing longevity by means of planetary periods, and sometimes in the analysis of constitution and character.
The Lord of the Nativity (Kurios) is the most dignified planet in the chart ac­ cording to multiple criteria. There are hints that it guides the soul and executes the plan and purpose of the life. The Kurios is a shadowy figure mentioned by only a few astrologers; later texts conflate the procedures for determining the
Kurios with those for the Oikodespotës.
Table 84. Terms for Predominator, Master, and Lord of the Nativity
ENGLISH GREEK PERSIAN/ARABIC LATIN
PREDOMINATOR (RELEASER, prorogator )
MASTER OF THE
NATIVITY
LORD OF THE
NATIVITY
Epikratêtôr (aphetes)
Oikodespotës
Kurios
Hïlâj Hyleg
Al-kadkhudäh Alcochoden
Al-mubtazz Almuten
The procedures for determining the Predominator, Master, and Lord of the
Nativity continued to be discussed and elaborated upon during the Arabic and
Medieval periods. The table above gives the corresponding terminology in the
A ntiochus , Summary 1.29,2.3; Porphyry , Commentary 30.

THE ULTIMATE RULERS OF THE CHART 1037 various languages for the same concepts. The Arabic term for the Predominator is the hllaj and the Latin is hyleg. The Master of the Nativity is called al-kadkhudah in Arabic and the Latin term is alcochoden. The Lord of the Nativity is sometimes conflated with the Arabic al-mubtazz or Latin almuten.
In surveying the voluminous ancient literature on the ultimate rulers of the nativity, the identification of these potent planets tantalizes us with the promise of their revelatory potential. However, their discovery remains elusive. Each of our ancient authors posited their own unique variations of the procedures.2 3 2 A ntiochus , Summary 1.29-30,2; Dorotheus , Carmen 3.2; V alens , Anthology 3.1-3;
Ptolemy , Tetrabiblos 3.2,3.10,4.10; Porphyry , Introduction 30; Firmicus , Mathesfc 4.6-8; Paulus , Introduction 36; H ephaistio, Apotelesmatics 1.13. 2.26. Voluminous mate­ rial also exists in the Arabic, Medieval, and Renaissance astrological texts.
3 Porphyry , Commentary 30.
The identification of these planets was laborious and sometimes incon­ clusive. Porphyry writes that the ancients “entangled their names and did not distinguish their properties”, and yet “each had its own force just like the ship owner (naukleros) and the ship captain (kubernetes)"* The procedures are chal­ lenging to present in a concise manner because they are written cryptically, vary in details, and often conflict from one author to the next. Furthermore, some of the texts are incomplete, breaking off midway in the manuscript transmission.
The discussion, debates, and variations surrounding the preferred procedure were carried through the writings of almost all of the Arabic, Medieval, and
Renaissance astrologers.
For most astrologers, the Oikodespotes and Kurios were the planets most in charge of the life—its length, physical constitution, character, and purpose. For some astrologers, knowledge of these planets was also a key to spiritual libera­ tion and transcendence. The proper identification of the Epikratetor, the Oiko­ despotes, and the Kurios thus took on a great religious significance for Porphyry who, as a student of the great Neoplatonist Plotinus, was foremost a philosopher concerned with the liberation of the soul. Porphyry believed that a careful study of these three planets could lead to the discovery of the natives personal dainion.
Later philosophers posed that knowledge of ones personal dainion could help that person understand the grand plan of their life, liberate them from fate by means of propitiating the proper planetary deity, inspire them towards virtuous behavior, and thereby steer them towards the fulfillment of their destiny.
In our exposition on the ultimate rulers of the nativity, we are going to fol­ low Porphyry for the most part because he distinguished between the Oikodes­ potes and the Kurios and gave different procedures for discovering each ruling planet. However, references to the variant methods used by other astrologers

1038 CHAPTER 90 will also be included in our exposition to make it clear that Porphyry’s approach was not a standard or uniform doctrine.
All the Hellenistic primary sources for this material are listed at the end of this section. You are encouraged to explore this additional material on your own for the details of the variant approaches. We will begin with a discussion of the
Predominator—the source of the life force.

The Predominator (epikratetor )
EPIKRATETOR COMES FROM THE GREEK VERB MEANING “TO CONFIRM, predominate, be victorious, prevail, and to be superior”. In an astrological sense, its lexical definition is given as ‘‘ruling star”. The identification of the Predomi­ nator (Epikratetor) is the all-important first step. The Master of the Nativity, the
Oikodespotes geneseds, is chosen from one of the Predominator s lords. In addi­ tion, the Predominator itself is the key to one of the methods used to time the length of life, wherein it is called the releaser (aphetes) or hyleg.
Dorotheus called the Predominator the indicator of the matter of life, and the Master the governor of the matter of life.1 The Predominator indicates the source or fountain (pege) of the life force, while the Master of the Nativity (Oiko­ despotes) distributes the flow of that vitality as the number of years of life. Both of these planets were used in various life-expectancy timing procedures, which demarcate periods of greater and weaker vitality.
While certain methods used to discover the Predominator and Master were similar and overlapped, others were quite diverse. Each astrologer had his own particular variations. However, all of them looked to the primacy of the Sun,
Moon, and Ascendant as the main candidates for the Predominator. The empha­ sis in modern astrology upon the Sun, Moon, and Ascendant as providing the basic psychological framework for the life thus reaches back into the beginnings of the tradition. This is because these points were originally understood as the places where the life force is most concentrated. Variations of the technique include additional points such as the Lot of Fortune and the Prenatal Luna ­ tion (suzugia) as candidates for the Predominator. Valens referred to these five points as the “places of life”.
We are going to begin with an explication of the search tor the Predominator that was given by Antiochus and Porphyry, and then guide you through the pro­ cess to determine your own Predominator. In the next chapter, we will present
Dorotheus , Carmen 3.2.1.

CHAPTER 91 1040 a summary of the procedures advocated by other astrologers, which sometimes indicate a different planet or point as Predominator.
THE PREDOMINATOR ACCORDING TO
ANTIOCHUS AND PORPHYRY
The optimal choice for the Predominator is a light that is angular, in the east, and of the sect of the chart. These conditions predispose the luminary to best repre­ sent the source of the life force, with the further authority to designate one of its lords as Oikodcspotes, which can then allot the years of life in accordance with its own condition. However, if the light of the sect is cadent, the predomination might go to the other light if it satisfies certain requirements. If both the Sun and
Moon are too weak by virtue of being cadent or in the west, the responsibility would go to the Ascendant to provide one of its lords as the ultimate ruler of life.
Before we examine this procedure in more detail, let us first look at the issue of the house system.
HOUSE SYSTEM
The Porphyry text that we are following does not specify any particular house system, so we may assume that he used whole signs for determining the Pre­ dominator. Dorotheus also seems to have used the whole-sign house system.
There are differing views as to whether Valens used the Porphyry house system for the entirety of this particular inquiry, or whether he used whole-sign houses for identifying the Predominator and limited the use of the Porphyry house sys­ tem to assess the strength of an Oikodespotes relative to its dynamic angularity in “profitable degrees ” that could span both an angular and succedent sign. Pto­ lemy employed his own version of equal houses. Given the complexity of this doctrine and the introductory scope of this book, I am going to keep my initial explanation as simple as possible. Thus, because Porphyry does not mention a switch to any other house system for this procedure, we will remain with the whole-sign house system.2
It is nevertheless important to be aware of the variants, which you may en ­ counter in your readings. If you are going to experiment with the approaches of other astrologers, I suggest that you use the house system that each astrologer
Remember that the text written by Porphyry and the originator of the Porphyry house system are not the same person. Be careful not to confuse the two.

THE PREDOMINATOR 1041 specifies in their method. You may well come up with different results for each method, but if you begin to mix the different house systems with the different methods (not to mention the timing techniques) you will undoubtedly end up in a quagmire. That being said, once you have understood the basic method outlined here, you are encouraged to think about these matters further and ex­ periment with other house systems and methods in a consistent manner. That way you can make an informed decision based upon your investigations.
SECT
Sect is the primary consideration that is agreed upon by all the astrologers. Be ­ cause of the primacy of sect in many other considerations, the light that leads the sect of the chart is naturally given first preference in the determination of the Predominator. Thus, the Sun will generally predominate in a day chart and the Moon in a night chart. However, the light must also meet the further criteria of angularity and easterly direction. If the sect light does not meet these require­ ments, the predomination may fall to the light of the contrary sect if it is in a better position to provide greater life force.
ANGULARITY
The light of the sect is subject to an examination of its relative angularity. If it is located in an angular or succedent house, it becomes a candidate, pending further requirements. Remember that the angular and succedent houses were thought to provide planets with a greater amount of consistent dynamic en ­ ergy for bringing about their matters, while the cadent houses indicated a di­ minishing of energy for manifesting external events. If the sect light was found declining in a cadent house, it would be immediately disqualified due to being too weak to hold this position of authority. In this case, the light contrary to the sect of the chart would then be examined for its relative angularity, before proceeding to the other requirement of direction. Should both lights fail the tests of angularity (i.e., if both lights are cadent), the predomination defaults to the Ascendant.
EASTERLY DIRECTION
After the determination of relative angularity, the next criterion is that the light be rising in the east. There are several different interpretations concerning the

1042 CHAPTER 91 meaning of eastern and western in the astrological texts.31 am taking the mean ­ ing of “rising in the east” in the Porphyry text to refer to the eastern hemisphere.
This means that the light, via diurnal motion, is rising from its anti-culmination point under the earth and ascending over the eastern horizon towards its cul­ mination overhead at the Midheaven. As you may recall, a planet that is rising in the east—similar to the Sun at sunrise—is associated with birth, growth, and vitality, while a planet that is setting in the west is heading towards the exhaus ­ tion of its vital force.4 3 These include: (1) When a planet rises before the Sun or Moon in an earlier zodiacal degree, it is said to be eastern; when it sets after the light in a later zodiacal degree it is said to be western. (2) With respect to visibility, a planet is eastern when it is outside the beams of the Sun and visible, and western when it is under the beams and invisible.
(3) Eastern quadrants are from the Ascendant/horizon to the Midheaven and from the
Descendant/horizon to the ic, while western quadrants are those from the Midheaven to the Descendant and the ic to the Ascendant. (4) The eastern hemisphere consists of the six houses where the Sun is rising in its diurnal motion from its anti-culmination point to the Midheaven—the third, second, first, twelfth, eleventh, and tenth houses; the western hemisphere consists of the six houses where the Sun is declining in its diurnal motion from the Midheaven to the anti-culmination point—the ninth, eighth, seventh, sixth, fifth, and fourth houses. (5) When an inferior planet (Mercury or Venus) is visible after sunset in the western sky, it is near its greatest eastern elongation. When an inferior planet is visible before sunrise in the eastern sky, it is near its greatest western elongation. (6) The terms oriental and occidental are used to refer to east or west and it is unclear if they are being used in reference to the Sun or to the hemispheres.
4 See volume one, chapter 21.
5 See chapter 62.
The easterly houses in which the Sun is rising are the third, second, first, twelfth, eleventh, and tenth. (The westerly houses are the ninth, eighth, seventh, sixth, fifth, and fourth). But since the cadent houses are automatically disquali­ fied as placements for the Predominator, this leaves only the second, first, elev­ enth, and tenth as qualifying locations.
There is another sense in which houses are thought to be ascending (epanaphora) or declining (apoklima) based upon the notion of angular triads.5 Epanaphora is the Greek term for a succedent house. One of its main meanings is “rising” or “ascending”. In the astrological sense, it refers to a house that is rising up towards an angular house—in other words, the succedent houses. The succe­ dent houses that are rising in the eastern hemisphere are the second and the eleventh, which are acceptable places for the location of a Predominator. Apokliina, whose meaning is “declining”, is the technical term for the cadent houses.
Antiochus, in this context, uses the phrase “declining in the east” to elimi­ nate the Sun by day from predomination; this would suggest the twelfth house.
The lights are also disqualified if they are “declining westward”. The cadent

THE PREDOMINATOR 1043 ninth and sixth houses are the declining cadent houses in the western hemi­ sphere.
More questions arise as to the precise definition of the Midheaven as the dividing line between eastern and western hemispheres of the chart. Does this mean the Midheaven as the entire tenth whole-sign house, or the Midheaven as the exact mc degree, which might fall in the eleventh or ninth whole-sign hous­ es? Or does it indicate the peak which is the midpoint of the equal tenth-house cusp? This is another point of ambiguity. The ancient astrologers themselves were aware of the different definitions for the same word, Midheaven. The same situation exists relative to the fourth whole-sign house or ic degree demarcating the end of the daily course of the lights setting in the west and the beginning of their rising in the east. Since we are using whole-sign houses for this explication of Porphyry’s procedure, let us take the Midheaven to encompass the entire tenth house as both angular and eastern.
In sum, our general guidelines couple the easterly directional requirement with the relative angularity of the house location. The light of the sect that is more angular and more easterly is the strongest candidate for the Predominator.
However, predomination can go to the contrary sect light if it is better posi­ tioned according to these criteria. If both lights are disqualified due to cadency, setting, and being westerly, the predomination usually goes to the Ascendant, but other variants are given by other authors.
OUTLINE OF THE PROCEDURE ACCORDING TO
ANTIOCHUS AND PORPHYRY day chart . By definition, the Sun will be located above the horizon (the exact degree of the Ascendant/Descendant axis) in the first, twelfth, eleventh, tenth, ninth, eighth, or seventh houses.
1. Look first to the Sun.
2. The Sun predominates when it is rising in the east. This essentially means that the Sun must be in the first, eleventh, or tenth houses. The presence of the lights in the cadent houses disqualifies them; in this case, if the Sun is in the cadent twelfth, it cannot predominate.
3. If the Sun is declining in the west by day, the Moon will predominate if she is in the east, even if she is in the “post-ascension of the Hour-Marker ” (i.e., the second house). Thus, if the Sun is in the cadent ninth house, then the
Moon in the second, first, eleventh, or tenth will predominate.
4. It is not altogether clear from these two texts what happens if the Sun is

1044 CHAPTER 91 in the eighth or seventh houses. Does “declining in the west by day” refer only to the cadent (apoklinia/declining) ninth house, or to all three houses (ninth, eighth, seventh) that mark the passage of the Suns westward descent and sinking below the horizon (at which time the chart then ceases to be a day chart)?
5. If both the Sun and Moon are declining westward (e.g., in the cadent ninth house), the Ascendant will have the predomination.
6. Porphyry states that if both lights are declining in cadent houses, the pre­ domination goes to the Ascendant. That implies the twelfth house as well.
night chart . By definition, the Sun can only be located beneath the hori­ zon (the exact degree of Ascendant/Descendant axis) in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh houses.
1. Look first to the Moon.
2. If the Moon is ascending in the east, it will be the Predominator. This means the Moon is in the second, first, eleventh, or tenth houses. Here we see pref­ erence given to the sect light that is rising in the east in angular or succedent houses.
3. If the Moon is declining in the west (ninth house) and the Sun is under the
Earth succedent to the Ascendant (i.e., the second house), the Sun will be the Predominator. Even though the Sun is not the light of the sect, if it is rising in the east, it is given preference over a Moon of the sect that is de­ clining in the west.
4. If both the Sun and Moon are under the Earth (beneath the horizon as de­ fined by the degrees of the Ascendant/Descendant axis), and both are locat­ ed in angular or succedent houses, the predomination will go to the Moon, because she is the light of the sect. But if the Moon is cadent (third or sixth houses), while the Sun is angular (in the fourth or under the horizon in the first or seventh), the Sun has predomination.
5. If both the Sun and Moon are in the third house (cadent), Porphyry gives predomination to the Ascendant: “if both luminaries are declining from the angles, then the Ascendant will be the Predominator”. He also gives pre­ domination to the Ascendant when both lights are declining, i.e., in the cadent third and/or sixth houses.
These guidelines specify many instances where the identification of the pre­ dominating light is clear. The strongest Predominator is the light of the sect that is angular or succedent and rising in the east. But if the preferred light is badly

THE PREDOMINATOR 1045 placed, the contrary sect light can take over the predomination. If both lights are too weak, the Ascendant assumes the predomination. This is certain when both lights are cadent, but in some cases we are left with ambiguity and incomplete explanations concerning the other house locations of the Sun and Moon.
Let us look at our example charts using Porphyry's method for determin­ ing the Predominator.
CHART I (porphyry ’s METHOD)
The chart of Jacqueline Kennedy-Onassis is a diurnal nativity. The Sun is the light of the sect. Thus, we begin our search with an examination of the Sun. Using the whole-sign house system, the entire tenth house is taken as the Midheaven:
the Sun is located in the angular tenth house and is in the eastern hemisphere.
Thus, it qualifies as the Predominator. Porphyry does not give any additional requirements in order to ratify the Predominator. The search and identification are complete.
CHART II (porphyry ’s METHOD)
Picasso has a nocturnal nativity, and the Moon is the light of the sect. It is lo­ cated in the succedent fifth house and the Sun is located in the angular fourth house. This chart presents an instance when both the Sun and Moon are beneath the horizon. According to Porphyry’s guideline, when both lights are under the earth, angular or succedent, the Moon will predominate because of sect. Thus the Moon is the Predominator.
In most cases, once the Predominator (Epikratetor) had been determined, the Master of the Nativity (Oikodespotes) was derived from it. This discussion will continue in the following chapter. But first, try your hand at discovering the
Predominator in your own chart.
Identifying the Predominator—Porphyry's Method

IDENTIFYING THE PREDOMINATOR — PORPHYRY ’S METHOD
In this exercise, and the exercises for the following chapters, I am going to pro­ vide a format to help you determine the Predominator (Epikratetor), the Master (Oikodespotes) and the Lord (Kurios) of the nativity according to Porphyry’s main method. For some charts, the process will give you a clear and obvious ruler. For others, you will come to a place where you are lost, confused, or stuck.
This is part of the enigma that has always been associated with this technique.
Please be aware that, due to the complexity and variations of this procedure, as well as ambiguities in the original texts, my presentation of the technique here is not exhaustive. What follows is my best attempt, based upon my reading of the texts, to decipher the ancient teachings in the spirit of the astrologers who have come before me.
OPTION 1: IS THE CHART A DAY CHART?
1. If yes> look to the Sun and proceed. If no, go directly to option 2.
2. Is the Sun in the first, eleventh, or tenth house?
3. If yes, the Sun is the Predominator.
4. Is the Sun in the twelfth or ninth house? If yes, the Sun is disqualified.
5. Look to the Moon. Is the Moon in the second, first, eleventh, or tenth house?
6. If yes, the Moon is the Predominator.
7. Are the Sun and Moon both in the ninth house?
8. If yes, the Ascendant degree is the Predominator.
9. Are the Sun and Moon both in the twelfth house?
10. If yes, the Ascendant degree is the Predominator.
11. There are no specific instructions for what to do if the Sun is in the ninth and the Moon is in the twelfth or vice versa, but the general pattern is that the predomination defaults to the Ascendant.
12. There are no instructions in Porphyry for the Sun in the eighth or seventh houses. These locations may be automatically eliminated because they are set­ ting in the west.

THE PREDOMINATOR 1047
OPTION 2: IS THE CHART A NIGHT CHART?
1. If yes, look to the Moon.
2. Is the Moon in the second, first, eleventh, or tenth house?
3. If yes, the Moon is the Predominator because of sect, relative angularity, and easterly directional rising.
4· Is the Moon in the twelfth or ninth house?
5· If yes, the Moon is disqualified because it is cadent. It is also disqualified if it is located in one of the other cadent houses, the third or the sixth.
6. Look to the Sun. Is the Sun in the second house or below the horizon in the first house?
7- If yes, the Sun is the Predominator because of relative angularity and easterly directional rising.
OPTION 3: IS THE CHART A NIGHT CHART WITH BOTH THE SUN AND
MOON BENEATH THE HORIZON?
(When you investigate the first or seventh houses, be sure you are looking at the interval beneath the degree of the Ascendant/Descendant axis).
1. Are both the Sun and Moon located in angular houses (first, fourth, or sev­ enth) orsuccedent houses (second or fifth)?
2. If yes, predomination will go to the Moon because she is the light of the sect.
3. Is the Moon located in the third or sixth house while the Sun is in the second, fourth, or under the horizon in the first or seventh?
4. If yes, the Sun is the Predominator because of relative angularity.
5. Are both the Sun and Moon located in the third or sixth houses?
6. If yes, predomination goes to the Ascendant.
7. There are no instructions for predomination if the Sun is in the fifth house and the Moon is in the third or sixth.
8. Does your chart have a predominating light?
9. If yes, is it the Sun or the Moon?
10. If no, predomination defaults to the Ascendant.
remember : the whole point of the Predominator is to indicate the place of the most potent life force in your chart. Having ascertained this, you can then use the Predominator to determine the Master of the Nativity.

Variations in the Search for the
Predominator
ALTHOUGH PORPHYRY WROTE IN THE THIRD CENTURY CE, HE WAS following the same source text as Antiochus, who dates from around the first century ce . His approach contained some elements that were common to the procedures of other astrologers who lived both before and after him, but they all had their individual variants. The original Greek source by Dorotheus has not survived in full, but before it was lost it was translated into Persian and then
Arabic, and it is from the Arabic edition that our English version derives. The text contains many interpolations from the Persian and Arabic eras, so is not a completely faithful representation of the Hellenistic tradition. However, in the early fifth century, Hephaistio of Thebes preserved some of Dorotheus’ writings in Greek. It is thanks to Hephaistios work that we can have greater confidence in Dorotheus* actual views on predomination.
The most detailed procedures for the determination of the Predominator are found in the second-century works of Valens and Ptolemy. These two au ­ thors were the ones most often referred to by later Hellenistic and Medieval astrologers regarding predomination and its use in length-of-life treatments.
Shortly after Porphyry, Firmicus Maternus and Paulus Alexandrinus composed their works in the mid-fourth century. Paulus added additional factors that later became an integral part of the Medieval corpus, while Firmicus Maternus pre­ sented an entirely different and unique method.
As you read through these variant approaches to predomination, it is useful to keep this historical context in mind. These writings spanned a period of fourto-five hundred years, and it was inevitable that astrologers would amend the doctrines that they transmitted, whether by not fully understanding them or by attempting to improve them. By the end of the Hellenistic era, there was no single, universally-agreed-upon procedure, though most approaches contained different combinations of the same basic factors. Sometimes their procedures yielded the same result and sometimes they did not.

DOROTHEUS AND THE PREDOMINATOR
Dorotheus’ search for the Predominator is aimed at finding a planet to “release” the life force in order to determine the number of years of life.1 Later traditions referred to this planet as the hyleg, while some modern translators have called it the “prorogator” or “controller”. In addition to the Sun and Moon as lights of the sect, Dorotheus expanded the possible candidates to include the Lot of Fortune and the Prenatal Lunation, before defaulting to the Ascendant. In a day chart the first choice is the Sun, or in a night chart, the Moon. The sect light must be located in the first, eleventh, or tenth houses. If not, the other light is examined, and then Fortune and the Prenatal Lunation, in that order. If none of them are located in the houses that provide them with the dynamic, stable, and increasing vital force to foster life, then the Predominator defaults to the Ascendant.
1 Dorotheus , Carmen Astrologicum 3.2. See chapter 97 for discussion of the releaser.
2 Decan is not included in the Greek version of Dorotheus transmitted by Hephaistio, thus suggesting it is an Arabic addition.
3 Dorotheus , Carmen Astrologicum 3.2.6.
Once a planet qualifies by house location, the planet (or the Ascendant) must meet further criteria. It must be witnessed by one of its lords—bound, triplicity, domicile, or exaltation—in order to confirm its authority to release the times of life. Dorotheus preferred that the bound lord of a potential can­ didate witness the Predominator within its own bounds, thus narrowing the range (figure 119). If the bound lord was out of range or in aversion to the Pre­ dominator, then the other lords were considered and examined in the following order—domicile, triplicity, exaltation, decan.1 It may be that a whole-sign aspect configuration is sufficient for witnessing. And although the text seems to hint that some orb of aspect is necessary, the range of this orb is not given.1 2 3
Dorotheus looked to one of the Predominators lords to find a planet that could confirm the Predominators authority to release the times of life via cir­ cumambulations through the bounds. While Dorotheus Greek text is no longer extant, Arabic translations call this planet al-kadkhudah (Latin alcochoden), an originally Persian word meaning “house master”, and thus a literal translation of the Greek oikodespotês. For Dorotheus, the only use of the al-kadkhudâh (the
Predominators lord) is to confirm the Predominator as releaser. This differs no­ tably from other Hellenistic astrologers, who used the Predominator’s lord more directly in character delineation, and for a separate longevity technique based on planetary periods. They referred to this planet as the Oikodespotês geneseôs (Master of the Nativity).

PREDOMINATOR CONFIRMED AS RELEASER BY
WITNESSING FROM THE BOUND LORD
In order to confirm the Predominator as a releaser for the times of life, the Predominator must be witnessed by its bound lord. In an example given by Dorotheas, the Pre­ dominator defaults to the Ascendant, and its bound lord must be investigated to see if it can confirm the Ascendant as releaser. The Ascendant (06° Scorpio) is in the bounds of Mars (01-0/ Scorpio), while the bound lord, Mars, is at 02° Virgo. Mars witnesses the Ascendant by a sextile. Most importantly, he casts his ray into the bounds that he rules, thus confirming the Ascendant as releaser. Note that Mars, at 02° Virgo, is not in the bounds of Mars, but in those of Mercury. What is important here is that Mars witnesses the degrees that he rules—in this case, the first seven degrees of the sign. If the bound lord does not cast a ray into its own bounds (i.e., if its ray falls outside this range), then it cannot confirm the Predominator as releaser. (See Dorotheas, Carmen
Astrologicum, 3.2.21-22).

VALENS AND THE PREDOMINATOR
Valens opens book three of the Anthology with a discussion about the identifi­ cation of the Predominator in regards to the support of life.4 He looked first to the Sun in a diurnal chart and to the Moon in a nocturnal chart. Either light could predominate in a day or night chart, depending upon which was better positioned by sect or triplicity, and house placement; any of the angular and succèdent houses could be considered. Placement in a cadent house almost al­ ways disqualified the light. When both lights were cadent, predomination went to the degree of the Ascendant or to the Midheaven. The bound lord of the Pre­ dominator was designated as the ruling Oikodespotês.
4 V alens , Anthology 3.1.
5 V alens , Anthology 3.1; Robert H and , commentary to V alens , Anthology 3.1 (Golden
Hind Press, 1994). p. 33» summarizes this as “first to bear on Horoskopos".
6 H and , commentary to V alens , Anthology 3.1 (1994), pp. 32-33 (reproduced with permis­ sion). We have made three additions to Hand ’s table following our close reading of Valens and Schmidt. (1) Under the heading Moon Predominates Over Sun, we have added “Moon in fourth > Sun in ninth”; (2) under the heading Other Predomination Rules, we have added “Moon in eleventh, Sun in ninth" (this addition overlaps with the conditions of an earlier rule); (3) under the same heading, we have added “Sun and Moon in tenth house ”.
Sect seemed to be the more important consideration. Valens wrote that if the Sun occupies Good Spirit (eleventh house) while the Moon culminates (tenth), the Sun will predominate. For Valens, a succèdent Sun in a day chart was thus more powerful than an angular Moon in a day chart. Similarly, if the
Moon is in the Setting Place (seventh) while the Sun is in the Post-Descending
Place (eighth), the Sun will predominate. The sect light in a succèdent house predominates over the contrary-sect light in an angular house, even if that succèdent house is in aversion to the Ascendant.
He also considered zodiacal sign rulerships in certain instances. In some cases, predomination could also go to the degree of the Prenatal New Moon or to the “first planet to bring its ray to the degree of the Ascendant”.5 Neither the
Sun in Libra nor the Moon in Scorpio could predominate unless they were par­ tile-conjunct the Ascendant (i.e., at the same whole-integer degree). Presumably this is because in these zodiac signs the lights are in their fall, but the exact conjunction with the Ascendant gives them sufficient strength to represent the life force. In addition, a Moon under the beams (i.e., a New Moon) could not predominate unless it was partile-conjunct the Ascendant.
Valens specified many individual instances of these variations. Robert Hand, in his commentary on book three of the Anthology, has provided a useful sum ­ mary of these predomination rules, which are reproduced in the following table.6

Table 85. Summary of Predomination Rules (after Robert Hand)
Sun Predominates Over Moon
Sun Moon
Sun in first house > Moon in twelfth house
Sun in eleventh house > Moon in tenth house
Sun in seventh house > Moon in eighth house
Sun in eighth house > Moon in seventh house
Sun in fourth house > Moon in ninth house
Sun in fifth house > Moon in ninth house
Moon Predominates Over Sun
Moon Sun
Moon in first house > Sun in ninth house
Moon in second house > Sun in ninth house
Moon in fourth house > Sun in ninth house
Moon in tenth house > Sun in ninth house
Moon in eleventh house > Sun in ninth house
Moon in fifth house > Sun in ninth house
When Neither Predominates
> = “predominates over”
Sun and Moon in ninth house -> Ascendant predominates
Sun and Moon in twelfth house -> Midheaven predominates
Sun and Moon in third house -> Midheaven predominates

Tabic S5. Summary of Predomination Rules (Continued)
Other Predomination Rules
Sun in fifth, Moon in ninth
Moon in eleventh, Sun in ninth
First to bring its ray to the degree of the
Ascendant predominates
Sun and Moon in first house
Sun and Moon in fourth house
Sun and Moon in seventh house
Sun and Moon in tenth house
Degree of New Moon predominates
Sun in Libra
Moon in Scorpio
Moon under beams
Cannot predominate unless partileconjunct the Ascendant
Regarding the times when neither Sun nor Moon predominate, Hand adds that “it would also seem reasonable to assume that the Sun in 6, Moon in 6 [i.e., the sixth house] causes the Midheaven to predominate, but the text does not say this”.7 His general conclusion is that “although there are gaps in the descriptions given here, the general idea is clear enough. The Predominator will be the light that is stronger in terms of house placement, sect, and to a limited extent, place­ ment in zddion”.8
The house system Valens used for this technique is not clear. He inserted a chapter describing the calculations for the so-called Porphyry house system between the chapter identifying the Predominator and the chapter discussing a length-of-life technique.9 Some astrologers have thus concluded that Valens used the Porphyry house system for both of these procedures. This presents a conflict. In Valens ’ predomination hierarchy, a light of the sect in an angular or succedent house predominates over the contrary sect light. From his examples, sect is a stronger consideration than house position. Valens did not make state­ ments in regards to disqualifying the cadent sectors of angular houses when using Porphyry house divisions. A diurnal chart by definition has the Sun above 7 H and , commentary to V alens , Anthology 3.1 (1994). P· 33· 8 H and , commentary to V alens , Anthology 3.1 (1994)» P· 33· 9 V alens , Anthology 3.2.

VARIATIONS IN THE SEARCH FOR THE PREDOMINATOR 1055 the Ascendant; if the diurnal Sun falls in the first house in the whole-sign sys­ tem, this same Sun will always be cadent in a quadrant-house division. In that case, the Sun as sect light (i.e., in a day chart) could never predominate when placed in the all-powerful first house.
At the end of the predomination chapter, Valens wrote further about choos­ ing the Oikodespotes as the bound lord of the Predominator. He required that it be witnessed by the predominating light and ideally wanted it to be located in the angular houses or in “profitable” degrees (chrematizousai moirai). In the next chapter he explained how to calculate the Porphyry houses and defined the profitable degrees as the first third of the interval that follows the angles as “powerful and profitable.”10 11 This interval can include degrees of the follow­ ing succedent sign. This is important when the Oikodespotes is used for lengthof-life calculations, as it could impart its full number of years when located in “profitable” degrees that might span both the angular and succedent signs fol­ lowing an angle." 10 See explanation of Porphyry houses in chapter 61.
11 See Seven Stars A strology , “Traditional Astrology of Death: A History ot Length ot
Life Special Techniques” (https://sevenstarsastrology.coin).
12 Tetrabiblos 3.10.
PTOLEMY AND THE PREDOMINATOR
Ptolemy also introduced his length-of-life procedure with the search for the
Predominator.12 He set forth an equal house system in order to determine the strongest places with reference to the “power of domination”. Ptolemy advised to begin the division of houses five degrees before the Ascendant degree, marking the horizon up to the next twenty-five degrees for the first house, and to apply these same divisions to mark each of the successive houses. Based upon these equal-house divisions, the preferred places were, in this order, the tenth, the first (anatole, rising), the eleventh, the seventh (dusis, setting), and the ninth. Note that these places of releasing are each configured to the Ascendant by square, sextile, opposition, or trine, and are thus considered places of fortunate topics.
Ptolemy did not disqualify the ninth house because it is cadent. He clearly dis­ qualified the eighth and twelfth due to their aversion from the Ascendant. He made a point that the entire region below the Earth must be disqualified for such an important consideration, with the exception of the portion of the As ­ cendant sign itself that was coming into the light, i.e., below the horizon.
Similar to the other astrologers, Ptolemy looked first to the light of the sect, the Sun by day or the Moon by night, in order to choose the Predominator. His

1056 CHAPTER 92 only requirement was that it be located above the horizon (as he defined the house cusp as five degrees before the actual Ascendant degree) in one of the aforementioned releasing houses.
In a day chart, if the Sun was not located in such a house, then the proce­ dure was (1) to first check the house location of the Moon. If the Moon was not in a releasing house, then (2) to see if there was a planet in one of these houses that had three or more modes of rulership13 in relation to the Sun, to the Prena ­ tal New Moon, or to the Ascendant.14 If none of these options yielded a Predominator, then (3) the predomination defaulted to the Ascendant.
13 Ptolemy designated the five modes of rulership as triplicity, domicile, exaltation, bounds, or in phase and aspect.
14 For example, if the Sun, Prenatal New Moon, or the Ascendant was at 27 0 Aquarius, making Saturn its domicile, triplicity, and bound lord, and Saturn was located in the tenth house, then Saturn could assume the role of Predominator.
15 For example, if the Lot of Fortune is at 27 0 Capricorn in the exaltation, triplicity, and bounds of Mars, and Mars is located in the eleventh house.
16 Paulus , Introduction 36.
In a night chart, if the Moon was not located in one of the releasing houses, then the order of investigation proceeded to (1) the Sun, then (2) to a planet in a releasing house having the greatest number of rulership modes to the Moon, (3) the Prenatal Full Moon, and (4) to the Lot of Fortune.15 16
If none of these options yielded a Predominator, and if the Prenatal Luna ­ tion was a New Moon, then predomination would go to the Ascendant or in the case of a Prenatal Full Moon, to the Lot of Fortune. If both the Sun and Moon were in releasing houses, the one that was in the most authoritative place should be preferred (i.e., the one in the strongest house in the order given above). Pref­ erence should be given to a ruling planet instead of the lights only if it occupied a releasing house and had a rulership relation to both sects.
PAULUS AND THE PREDOMINATOR
Paulus’ method for identifying the Predominator combined elements from many of the previous astrologers, but he also added features of his own.* 6 His ultimate objective was to find a planetary ruler of a qualified Predominator to use as an Oikodespotes in order to calculate the years of life. He did not specify any particular house system.
He gave first preference to the Sun by day and to the Moon by night. If the lights were located in any of the houses that his method required (Sun: first, tenth, eleventh, and in the seventh and eighth when their zodiacal signs are masculine;

Moon: first, tenth, seventh, fourth, fifth, eleventh, second, and eighth). However, if the Sun and Moon were not located in Paulus’ set of authoritative houses, then the search went to the Prenatal New or Full Moon. Should they prove inactive (that is, not located in the required houses), the Lot of Fortune and the Lot of
Spirit should be examined in a similar manner. The final default was to the As ­ cendant. Once the Predominator has been determined, one of its lords is chosen as the Master of the Nativity, which is explained in the next chapter. It is not altogether clear if, in addition to the house location requirement, the potential
Predominator had to be witnessed by one of its lords in order to confirm it. In the case that it wasn ’t, the search might have to continue.
SUMMARY
Identifying the Predominator—the source of the vital life force—was a complex enterprise with different approaches and methods. Many Hellenistic authors had a hand in trying to solve the great mystery of the length of life. However, the correct identification of the Predominator could vary depending upon the method and house system employed.
There were certain features that everyone agreed upon. The Sun and Moon were the prime candidates, and first choice went to the sect light of the chart.
The saying that the Sun and Moon were “the givers of all” may well have referred to their primacy as givers of life.
The house placement of the lights was all-important. Everyone agreed that the first, eleventh, and tenth houses were the strongest placements for a poten­ tial Predominator. Everyone except Ptolemy, who included the ninth house in his list, automatically eliminated the cadent houses. This speaks to the impor­ tance of the dynamic energy provided by the angular houses, and to a somewhat lesser extent by the succedent houses, to sustain and revitalize the life force. The cadent houses by contrast represented the places where the cyclic trajectory of energy had been exhausted; one might even say they are resting places that need to “lie fallow” before renewal and reactivation can occur. They were seen as too weak and deficient to sustain the life force.
The choice of house systems was one major difference among the authors.
Thus, candidates that qualified due to being located in an angular house in one system would be rejected in another house system that placed that planet in a cadent house. In some instances it is not clear which house system an astrologer used for this purpose, unless specifically indicated. In these cases, we have de­ faulted to whole-sign houses for purposes of illustration.

The potential candidates for Predominator also varied among astrologers.
Some looked only to the Sun and Moon. Others included the Lot of Fortune and the Prenatal Lunation—either the New Moon or the Full Moon —as well as the Lot of Spirit, which are all derivatives of the two lights. Ptolemy added the possibility that some dominant planet might assume this role. And should none of these lights, points, or planets meet the requirements, the default was gener ­ ally to the Ascendant, and for Valens, in some instances, even to the mc .
Some, but not all, required that a potential Predominator be witnessed by one of its lords in order to confirm it for the office. Hie bound lord headed the list, and for Valens this was the only lord that could designate an Oikodespotes.
Should the bound lord be in aversion to the Predominator, other astrologers would look to witnessing by its domicile, triplicity, or exaltation lord in order to validate the power vested in it. The support and hence power that comes from a planets lord as host was thus seen as an essential requirement by many astrol­ ogers. Overall, the identification of the all-important Predominator was not a simple process, nor did it result in a universally agreed-upon outcome.
The next chapter will explore how the Predominator was used to appoint the Master of the Nativity. The final chapters will detail its use in longevity cal­ culations.
-► EXAMPLE CHARTS
Let us look at our example charts using the alternative methods for deter­ mining the Predominator according to Dorotheas, Valens, Ptolemy, and
Paulus.
chart 1
In the previous chapter, using Porphyry's method, we found the Predominator to be the Sun.
DOROTHEUS ’ METHOD
The Sun is the light of the sect in this diurnal chart. It is located in the tenth whole-sign house and qualifies as a candidate. Jupiter is its bound lord, but Ju­ piter at 09° Gemini does not witness the Sun at 05° Leo within its (i.e., Jupiter’s) own bounds in Leo, which extend from the first to the sixth degrees. Next in line is the triplicity lord of the Sun. In this case, the Sun is its own triplicity lord and can confirm itself as Predominator.

VALENS ’ METHOD
If we use the whole-sign house system, the Sun as the sect light of this diurnal chart is located in the angular tenth house. The Sun clearly predominates over the Moon, which is located in the cadent sixth house. Some astrologers may wish to consider whether Valens used the Porphyry house system for this proce­ dure. Here, the Sun as sect light is found cadent in the ninth house and disqual­ ified. The Moon, examined next, is also cadent (sixth house) and disqualified.
Because Valens does not address the case of the Sun in the ninth house and the Moon in the sixth, he may have defaulted either to the Ascendant or to the
Midheaven as a potential Predominato!·. If one of these qualified, it could then release the times of life and appoint the Oikodespotès.
ptolemy ’s method
Ptolemy uses his version of an equal house system. This is a day chart and thus
Ptolemy would look first to the placement of the Sun. The Sun is located in the cadent ninth house, which Ptolemy, unlike the other astrologers, accepts as a valid place for a Predominator used as a releaser.
paulus ’ method
Using whole-sign houses, the Sun is the sect light and is located in the tenth house. The Sun is thus the Predominator.
Table 86. Alternative Procedures for the Predominator, Chart One
PORPHYRY Sun
DOROTHEUS Sun
VALENS 1 (WHOLE SIGN)
VALENS 2 (PORPHYRY)
