Dorotheus , Carmen 3.2.1.

CHAPTER 91 1040 a summary of the procedures advocated by other astrologers, which sometimes indicate a different planet or point as Predominator.
THE PREDOMINATOR ACCORDING TO
ANTIOCHUS AND PORPHYRY
The optimal choice for the Predominator is a light that is angular, in the east, and of the sect of the chart. These conditions predispose the luminary to best repre­ sent the source of the life force, with the further authority to designate one of its lords as Oikodcspotes, which can then allot the years of life in accordance with its own condition. However, if the light of the sect is cadent, the predomination might go to the other light if it satisfies certain requirements. If both the Sun and
Moon are too weak by virtue of being cadent or in the west, the responsibility would go to the Ascendant to provide one of its lords as the ultimate ruler of life.
Before we examine this procedure in more detail, let us first look at the issue of the house system.
HOUSE SYSTEM
The Porphyry text that we are following does not specify any particular house system, so we may assume that he used whole signs for determining the Pre­ dominator. Dorotheus also seems to have used the whole-sign house system.
There are differing views as to whether Valens used the Porphyry house system for the entirety of this particular inquiry, or whether he used whole-sign houses for identifying the Predominator and limited the use of the Porphyry house sys­ tem to assess the strength of an Oikodespotes relative to its dynamic angularity in “profitable degrees ” that could span both an angular and succedent sign. Pto­ lemy employed his own version of equal houses. Given the complexity of this doctrine and the introductory scope of this book, I am going to keep my initial explanation as simple as possible. Thus, because Porphyry does not mention a switch to any other house system for this procedure, we will remain with the whole-sign house system.2
It is nevertheless important to be aware of the variants, which you may en ­ counter in your readings. If you are going to experiment with the approaches of other astrologers, I suggest that you use the house system that each astrologer
Remember that the text written by Porphyry and the originator of the Porphyry house system are not the same person. Be careful not to confuse the two.

THE PREDOMINATOR 1041 specifies in their method. You may well come up with different results for each method, but if you begin to mix the different house systems with the different methods (not to mention the timing techniques) you will undoubtedly end up in a quagmire. That being said, once you have understood the basic method outlined here, you are encouraged to think about these matters further and ex­ periment with other house systems and methods in a consistent manner. That way you can make an informed decision based upon your investigations.
SECT
Sect is the primary consideration that is agreed upon by all the astrologers. Be ­ cause of the primacy of sect in many other considerations, the light that leads the sect of the chart is naturally given first preference in the determination of the Predominator. Thus, the Sun will generally predominate in a day chart and the Moon in a night chart. However, the light must also meet the further criteria of angularity and easterly direction. If the sect light does not meet these require­ ments, the predomination may fall to the light of the contrary sect if it is in a better position to provide greater life force.
ANGULARITY
The light of the sect is subject to an examination of its relative angularity. If it is located in an angular or succedent house, it becomes a candidate, pending further requirements. Remember that the angular and succedent houses were thought to provide planets with a greater amount of consistent dynamic en ­ ergy for bringing about their matters, while the cadent houses indicated a di­ minishing of energy for manifesting external events. If the sect light was found declining in a cadent house, it would be immediately disqualified due to being too weak to hold this position of authority. In this case, the light contrary to the sect of the chart would then be examined for its relative angularity, before proceeding to the other requirement of direction. Should both lights fail the tests of angularity (i.e., if both lights are cadent), the predomination defaults to the Ascendant.
EASTERLY DIRECTION
After the determination of relative angularity, the next criterion is that the light be rising in the east. There are several different interpretations concerning the

1042 CHAPTER 91 meaning of eastern and western in the astrological texts.31 am taking the mean ­ ing of “rising in the east” in the Porphyry text to refer to the eastern hemisphere.
This means that the light, via diurnal motion, is rising from its anti-culmination point under the earth and ascending over the eastern horizon towards its cul­ mination overhead at the Midheaven. As you may recall, a planet that is rising in the east—similar to the Sun at sunrise—is associated with birth, growth, and vitality, while a planet that is setting in the west is heading towards the exhaus ­ tion of its vital force.4 3 These include: (1) When a planet rises before the Sun or Moon in an earlier zodiacal degree, it is said to be eastern; when it sets after the light in a later zodiacal degree it is said to be western. (2) With respect to visibility, a planet is eastern when it is outside the beams of the Sun and visible, and western when it is under the beams and invisible.
(3) Eastern quadrants are from the Ascendant/horizon to the Midheaven and from the
Descendant/horizon to the ic, while western quadrants are those from the Midheaven to the Descendant and the ic to the Ascendant. (4) The eastern hemisphere consists of the six houses where the Sun is rising in its diurnal motion from its anti-culmination point to the Midheaven—the third, second, first, twelfth, eleventh, and tenth houses; the western hemisphere consists of the six houses where the Sun is declining in its diurnal motion from the Midheaven to the anti-culmination point—the ninth, eighth, seventh, sixth, fifth, and fourth houses. (5) When an inferior planet (Mercury or Venus) is visible after sunset in the western sky, it is near its greatest eastern elongation. When an inferior planet is visible before sunrise in the eastern sky, it is near its greatest western elongation. (6) The terms oriental and occidental are used to refer to east or west and it is unclear if they are being used in reference to the Sun or to the hemispheres.
4 See volume one, chapter 21.
5 See chapter 62.
The easterly houses in which the Sun is rising are the third, second, first, twelfth, eleventh, and tenth. (The westerly houses are the ninth, eighth, seventh, sixth, fifth, and fourth). But since the cadent houses are automatically disquali­ fied as placements for the Predominator, this leaves only the second, first, elev­ enth, and tenth as qualifying locations.
There is another sense in which houses are thought to be ascending (epanaphora) or declining (apoklima) based upon the notion of angular triads.5 Epanaphora is the Greek term for a succedent house. One of its main meanings is “rising” or “ascending”. In the astrological sense, it refers to a house that is rising up towards an angular house—in other words, the succedent houses. The succe­ dent houses that are rising in the eastern hemisphere are the second and the eleventh, which are acceptable places for the location of a Predominator. Apokliina, whose meaning is “declining”, is the technical term for the cadent houses.
Antiochus, in this context, uses the phrase “declining in the east” to elimi­ nate the Sun by day from predomination; this would suggest the twelfth house.
The lights are also disqualified if they are “declining westward”. The cadent

THE PREDOMINATOR 1043 ninth and sixth houses are the declining cadent houses in the western hemi­ sphere.
More questions arise as to the precise definition of the Midheaven as the dividing line between eastern and western hemispheres of the chart. Does this mean the Midheaven as the entire tenth whole-sign house, or the Midheaven as the exact mc degree, which might fall in the eleventh or ninth whole-sign hous­ es? Or does it indicate the peak which is the midpoint of the equal tenth-house cusp? This is another point of ambiguity. The ancient astrologers themselves were aware of the different definitions for the same word, Midheaven. The same situation exists relative to the fourth whole-sign house or ic degree demarcating the end of the daily course of the lights setting in the west and the beginning of their rising in the east. Since we are using whole-sign houses for this explication of Porphyry’s procedure, let us take the Midheaven to encompass the entire tenth house as both angular and eastern.
In sum, our general guidelines couple the easterly directional requirement with the relative angularity of the house location. The light of the sect that is more angular and more easterly is the strongest candidate for the Predominator.
However, predomination can go to the contrary sect light if it is better posi­ tioned according to these criteria. If both lights are disqualified due to cadency, setting, and being westerly, the predomination usually goes to the Ascendant, but other variants are given by other authors.
OUTLINE OF THE PROCEDURE ACCORDING TO
ANTIOCHUS AND PORPHYRY day chart . By definition, the Sun will be located above the horizon (the exact degree of the Ascendant/Descendant axis) in the first, twelfth, eleventh, tenth, ninth, eighth, or seventh houses.
1. Look first to the Sun.
2. The Sun predominates when it is rising in the east. This essentially means that the Sun must be in the first, eleventh, or tenth houses. The presence of the lights in the cadent houses disqualifies them; in this case, if the Sun is in the cadent twelfth, it cannot predominate.
3. If the Sun is declining in the west by day, the Moon will predominate if she is in the east, even if she is in the “post-ascension of the Hour-Marker ” (i.e., the second house). Thus, if the Sun is in the cadent ninth house, then the
Moon in the second, first, eleventh, or tenth will predominate.
4. It is not altogether clear from these two texts what happens if the Sun is

1044 CHAPTER 91 in the eighth or seventh houses. Does “declining in the west by day” refer only to the cadent (apoklinia/declining) ninth house, or to all three houses (ninth, eighth, seventh) that mark the passage of the Suns westward descent and sinking below the horizon (at which time the chart then ceases to be a day chart)?
5. If both the Sun and Moon are declining westward (e.g., in the cadent ninth house), the Ascendant will have the predomination.
6. Porphyry states that if both lights are declining in cadent houses, the pre­ domination goes to the Ascendant. That implies the twelfth house as well.
night chart . By definition, the Sun can only be located beneath the hori­ zon (the exact degree of Ascendant/Descendant axis) in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh houses.
1. Look first to the Moon.
2. If the Moon is ascending in the east, it will be the Predominator. This means the Moon is in the second, first, eleventh, or tenth houses. Here we see pref­ erence given to the sect light that is rising in the east in angular or succedent houses.
