PART TEN
GLOSSARY, SOURCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY, INDEX

Glossary acronychal phase A planet is acronychal (in opposition to the Sun) when it rises as the Sun sets or sets as the Sun rises. The superior planets Mars, Ju­ piter, and Saturn are in the acronychal phase from the time they make their retrograde station through to their opposition to the Sun, when they are in curtailed passage, and until they make their direct station. The Greek term is akronuktos, which means "rising at sunset”.
additive in numbers (or times ) Most often refers to a planet that is in direct motion, where its zodiacal longitude increases each day as recorded in an ephemeris. The Greek word is prosthetikosy “adding, filling”. Contrast with subtractive in numbers (or times ) (aphairetikos). Not to be confused with accelerating (or decelerating) speed, which is called moving toward the greater (or lesser) extent of a planets course.
adherence A faster-moving planet applying to a bodily conjunction with a slower-moving planet within 30, or the Moon applying bodily to a planet within 130. The Greek term is kollesis, which means to glue or bond together.
advantageous Commonly refers to house division locations in which plan­ ets are more effective in bringing about their matters. See chrematis - tikos.
al-kadkhudah , alcochoden Middle Persian term adopted into Arabic and later Latin (alcochoden) for the planet used to determine life expectan­ cy. See master of the nativity (Oikodespotes).
almuten , al-mubtazz Medieval terms for “victor”, a planet that has the greatest authority to determine a particular house topic, or the greatest au ­ thority over the chart and life of the native as a whole. The Latin term, Almuten, is derived from the Arabic, al-mubtazz. See also kurios , “Lord of the Nativity”.
angle Term used to refer to any one of the four cardinal points in a horoscope

n6o GLOSSARY relative to the Suns motion, as observed in the Northern Hemisphere facing south. They are the Ascendant (sunrise point on the eastern horizon), the
Midheaven, also called Medium Cadi and abbreviated as mc (the Suns high­ est elevation overhead in the southern sky)» the Descendant (sunset point on the western horizon), and the Imum Coeli, abbreviated as ic (Sun’s lowest passage under the Earth). In Greek, these four angles are called Horoskopos, mesouranema, dusis, and hupogeion respectively. These are also the names of the first, tenth, seventh, and fourth houses. The Greek terms for angles are gonia and kentron.
angular house The first, fourth, seventh, and tenth houses. Traditional astrology holds that planets are the strongest when located in the angular houses. In Greek, an angular house is called a kentron, and this word is sometimes translated as pivot, goad, center, stake, or cardine. The degree span of each angular house may vary depending upon which Hellenistic house system is used—-whole sign, Porphyry, or equal.
annual lord of the year A planet that assumes governance of the chart for the duration of one year based upon a time-lord procedure.
apogee The furthest distance of a planet from the Earth. Contrast with peri­ gee, the nearest distance of a planet from the Earth.
applying aspect A term used to describe a faster-moving planet approach­ ing, or applying to, an aspect with a slower-moving planet. Aspects are con­ sidered more powerful when forming (applying) rather than when separat­ ing. See connection (sunaphe).
aquarius Originally the sidereal constellation that the Greeks called the Wa ­ ter-Bearer, Aquarius indicates the tropical sign that spans the second thir­ ty-degree segment of the Suns annual path following the Winter Solstice.
Its characteristics are drawn from both its image and its seasonal qualities.
As the Water-Bearer, Aquarius is human, rational, winged, mute, unprolific, free, and seasonally, very wet and very cold. As a sign it is diurnal, mas ­ culine, solid, wintry, and airy. It is the domicile of Saturn, exalts no planet, and is the triplicity of Saturn by day and of Mercury by night. Aquarius was envisioned as the shins and ankles of the cosmos in the therna mundi and as the calves and ankles of the human body. Depending upon the relationship with the domicile lord, those born under Aquarius were described as fearful, malicious, concealers, haters of their own families, misanthropists, deceit­ ful, impious, betrayers of truth, workers in hard materials, practitioners of handicrafts or waterside trades. The Greek word for Aquarius is hudrochoos, “water-pourer”.

GLOSSARY 1161
A rabic part See LOT.
aries Originally the sidereal constellation that the Greeks called the Ram, Ar ­ ies indicates the tropical sign that spans the first thirty degrees of the Suns annual path following the Spring Equinox. Its characteristics are drawn from both its image and seasonal qualities. As a Ram, Aries is bestial, qua ­ drupedal, terrestrial, free, unprolific, semi-vocal, lewd, licentious, and vi­ olent. As a sign it is diurnal, masculine, equinoctial, vernal, and fiery. It is the domicile of Mars, the exaltation of the Sun, the triplicity of the Sun by day and of Jupiter by night. Aries was envisioned as the summit, the head of the cosmos in the thenia mundi, and corresponds to the head and face of the human body. Depending upon the relationship with the domicile lord, those born under Aries were described as bright, bold, commanding, great-hearted, boastful, unruly, intimidating, or irascible. The Greek word for Aries is krios, “ram ”.
ascendant The exact degree of the zodiacal sign that is rising above the eastern horizon at the moment of the natives birth. The sign in which the
Ascendant degree is located is known as the rising or ascending sign and is generally used as a descriptor of appearance and character. The Greek term is Horoskopos, from which the word horoscope is derived. Sometimes this term refers to the whole-sign first house. Contrast with descendant , which is the exact degree of the zodiacal sign that is setting below the west­ ern horizon at the moment of birth.
ascending node The point where the plane of the Moon or a planet in its orbital motion crosses the ecliptic from a southerly to northerly direction.
The Greek term is anabibazd, which means “to go up”. Also known as the
North Node, it is called the North Lunar Node when referring to the orbit of the Moon.
ascensional time The amount of time it takes for a sign to ascend fully over the eastern horizon. It is also known as oblique ascension. The ascensional time of a sign varies according to geographical latitude. The Greek term is anaphoras chronos.
aspect The angular relationship between two planets or other celestial bodies.
Ancient astrologers understood this relationship as the configuration made by two planets occupying signs in conformity with the sides of regular poly­ gons, such as a sextile from the sides of a hexagon, a square from the sides of a square, and a trine from the sides of a triangle. Modern astrologers define this relationship in terms of planets separated by an arc of a certain number of degrees that are derived from the division of the circle by whole num ­

1162 GLOSSARY bers, regardless of the signs these planets occupy. Both approaches agree that planets linked in this manner influence one another’s significations in harmonious or unharmonious ways. The closer the planets are to the exact arcs of separation specified by o° (conjunction), 6o° (sextile), 90° (square), 120° (trine), or 180° (opposition), the more active the influence. Traditional astrologers use only these five aspect configurations; modern astrologers employ a host of additional aspects.
assembly A faster-moving planet applying to an adherence with a slow­ er-moving planet by more than three but less than fifteen degrees. Gener­ ally, the planets are in the same zodiacal sign. The Greek word is sunodos, “assembly, meeting, gathering” (from sun-, “together” + hodos, “way, road”), also translated as “concourse ”.
aversion A term used by ancient astrologers to refer to planets occupying signs that are unconnected to one another, specifically the whole-sign semi-sextile (30°) and the whole-sign inconjunct (150°). The Greek term is apostrophe, which means “turn away” or “avert.” bad houses or places Generally speaking, the houses that are in aversion to the Ascendant (i.e., the second, sixth, eighth, and twelfth houses) are con­ sidered to be locations of the more difficult or unfortunate topics of life. The third house is sometimes classified with the good houses and sometimes with the bad. Planets located in these houses are said to be badly situated or positioned. See chrematistikos .
benefic Literally a “doer of good”, usually used to describe the planets Venus and Jupiter (the lesser benefic and greater benefic respectively). The Greek term is agathopoios (from agathos, “good” + poied, “to create, make, do”).
Contrast malefic .
bi-corporeal A zodiacal sign that is double-bodied: Gemini (the twins),
Virgo (the maiden carrying a shaft of wheat), Sagittarius (the archer riding a horse), and Pisces (the two fishes). These are called the mutable signs in modern astrology. The Greek term is disoma, “two-bodied”, “bi-corporeal”.
See quadruplicity .
bodily conjunction An applying conjunction between the physical bod­ ies of two planets, usually in the same zodiacal sign or close to the same degree. The bodily conjunction is contrasted with the applying aspect (sometimes called a figural conjunction), where it is the rays rather than the bodies of the two planets that come together (i.e., by sextile, square, trine, or opposition). The Greek term is sunaphe somatikos (from sun- “together”,

GLOSSARY 1163
+ haptô, ‘‘to join”, and somatikos, “somatic, bodily”).
BODYGUARD See SPEAR-BEARING.
bonification Specific aspect relations involving the benefics (Venus and
Jupiter), plus other conditions such as zodiacal signs or house placements that enhance a planets favorable significations or lessen its unfavorable sig­ nifications. The Greek term is agathunô, “honor, magnify, make beneficent” (from agathos, “good”).
bounds (terms ) The five unequal divisions of each zodiacal sign in which each segment is under the rulership of a different planet, called its bound lord. The bound lords are Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, but cannot be the Sun or Moon. Called “terms” in Medieval astrology. There are several different systems of bounds recorded in the ancient astrological lit­ erature; the most common set in the Hellenistic literature are known as the
Egyptian bounds. The Greek word is horion, which is sometimes translated as “boundaries”, “limits”, or “confines”.
cadent house The third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses. Traditional as­ trology considers planets to be weak when located in the cadent houses. In
Greek, a cadent house is called apoklima (from apo- “away from ” and klinô, “bend, slant, wane ”), sometimes translated as “declining” or “falling away ”.
cancer Originally the sidereal constellation that the Greeks called the Crab,
Cancer indicates the tropical sign that spans the first thirty-degree segment of the Sun ’s annual path following the Summer Solstice. Its characteristics are drawn from both its image and its seasonal qualities. As the Crab, Can ­ cer is bestial, amphibious, fertile, mute, servile, rough-skinned, and broken.
As a sign, it is nocturnal, feminine, solstitial, summery, and watery. It is the domicile of the Moon, the exaltation of Jupiter, the triplicity of Venus by day and of Mars by night. Cancer was envisioned as the Ascendant, breast, and ribs of the cosmos in the thema mundi and corresponds to the breasts and stomach of the human body. Depending upon the relationship with the do­ micile lord, those born under Cancer were described as ambitious, popular, changeable, fond of pleasure and entertaining, cheerful, easily downcast, in­ constant in knowledge, wandering, and journeying abroad. The Greek word for Cancer is karkinos, “crab”.
capricorn Originally the sidereal constellation that the Greeks called the
Goat-Horned One, Capricorn indicates the tropical sign that spans the first thirty-degree segment of the Suns annual path following the Winter
Solstice. Its characteristics are drawn from both its image and its seasonal

1164 GLOSSARY qualities. As the Goat-Horned One, Capricorn is bestial, amphibious, unprolific, semi-vocal, dual, servile, rough-skinned, violent, lecherous. As a sign it is nocturnal, feminine, solstitial, wintry, and earthy (though very wet by season). It is the domicile of Saturn, the exaltation of Mars, the triplicity of Venus by day and of the Moon by night. Capricorn was envisioned as the knees of the cosmos, the Descendant of the thema mundi, and corresponds to the knees and sinews of the human body. Depending upon the relation­ ship with the domicile lord, those born under Capricorn were described as bad yet pretending goodness and sincerity, hardworking, burdened with responsibilities, planners of great works, prone to making unfortunate mis­ takes, critical, fickle, fond of jokes, stone cutters and farmers, hunchbacked, and lame. The Greek word for Capricorn is aigokerds, “goat-horned”.
CARDINAL See QUADRUPLICITY.
casting a ray Each planet was said to send forth seven rays, three upward at an arc of 6o°, 90°, and 120°, three downward at the same intervals, and one diametrically opposite at a 180° interval. The Greek expression is aphimi aktis (from aphiemi, “to send” and aktis, “ray, beam”). Compare striking with a ray .
celestial equator The equator of the Earth projected out into space, one of the three main celestial coordinate systems of celestial latitude.
celestial latitude The distance of a planet north or south of the ecliptic.
celestial longitude The distance of a planet along the ecliptic measured in degrees from o° Aries.
chaldean order The order of the planets from the slowest to the fastest:
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon. Also called the sev­ en-zoned sphere.
chariot When a planet occupies its own domicile, exaltation, or bound (some authors include triplicity as well). This condition was thought to protect the planet from being weakened (debilitated) when under the de­ structive beams of the Sun. The Greek term is lampene, which specifically indicates a covered chariot (hence protection from the Sun, in addition to power and mobility).
chrematistikos A technical term with multiple meanings used in relation to the advantageous or disadvantageous quality of certain houses. The pri­ mary meaning of chrematistikos is money-making, but the underpinning idea is “effectiveness”, especially in business, commerce, negotiation, and other public affairs. By extension, it refers to the ability to successfully bring

GLOSSARY 1165 about ones activities in a way that leads to prosperity. In an astrological context, it refers to houses that are “advantageous”, “effective”, “useful ”, and “operative” in relation to bringing about a planets “business” or “affairs” (sig­ nifications). The opposite term, achrematistikos, means “disadvantageous, useless, slack, ineffective, inoperative”. Related terms include chrestos, “use ­ ful, good, effective, fortunate, propitious”, achrestos, “useless, unkind, inef­ fective, unprofitable”, and the verb chrematizo, “to have dealings, conduct business, negotiate, operate”. In an oracular context, the term indicates the responsiveness (versus unresponsiveness) of an oracle. Ancient authors give two different classifications of chrematistikos houses. According to Nechepso and Serapio, the four angular houses (first, fourth, seventh, tenth) and the four succedent houses (second, fifth, eighth, eleventh) are chrematis­ tikos, while the cadent houses (third, sixth, ninth, twelfth) are achrestos.
This refers to the relative quantity of dynamic energy and stable support that is available to planets located in these houses. According to Hermes,
Timaeus, Porphyry, and Rhetorius, the four angular houses, plus the fifth, ninth, and eleventh houses, are chrematistikos (good, advantageous), while the remaining houses (second, third, sixth, eighth, twelfth) are achrestos (bad, disadvantageous). Houses that are configured by whole-sign aspects to the Ascendant are the locations of the more favorable and fortunate top­ ics of life, while those houses that are in aversion to the Ascendant are the location of unfavorable or difficult topics. The third house has a mixed clas­ sification according to modern commentators and can be considered the “least good of the good” and the “least bad of the bad”.
circumambulation Literally “to walk around ”, this is a term used in tradi­ tional timing techniques for advancing a planet around the chart at a fixed rate. When used with the bounds, this procedure establishes a series of time lords that govern the life for various periods of time; it is also used in lengthof-life determinations. Circumambulations are conceptually similar to pri­ mary directions. The Greek term is peripatesis (from peri-, “around ” and pateo, “to walk”).
CO-MASTER OF THE NATIVITY See JOINT-MASTER OF THE NATIVITY combust Combust is a Medieval term from the Latin combustus, meaning to be “burned up” or “ruined”. This occurs during a planets lying-hidden phase, when under the beams, i.e., when it is extremely close to the Sun.
Various authorities place this distance from 1-90 degrees on either side of the Sun. See also under the beams , lying -hidden phase .
configuration A term in traditional astrology that refers to sextile, square,

1166 GLOSSARY trine, and opposition aspects envisioned as planets standing in conformity to the sides of these regular polygons (hexagon, tetragon, trigon, diameter).
Planets can be configured either by whole sign or by degree. Configura ­ tions are the means by which planets can see and witness each other and enter into harmonious or unharmonious relationships. The Greek word is schèmatìsmos, from schema, “form, shape, figure”.
conjoin When a faster-moving planet is in the process of coming togeth­ er bodily or by aspect ray with a slower-moving planet. See adherence ,
CONNECTION, PARTILE ASPECT.
conjunction When planets occupy the same zodiacal sign and are close to the same zodiacal degree. The exact orb varies according to the astrologer.
From the Latin, conjunctus, meaning “connection” and conjungò, meaning “to join together” or “to unite”.
connection A faster-moving planet moving towards union with a slowermoving planet within a precise range of 30 by sextile, square, trine, or oppo­ sition. If the faster-moving planet is the Moon, the precise range is 130. The
Greek term is sunaphè, from sunaptó, “join together, connect”. Also trans­ lated as “engagement ”.
containment A planet is said to be contained when another planet sends whole-sign aspect rays (sextile, square, trine, opposition) into the zodiacal signs on either side of it, without any other planet interposing rays in the intervening space. The Greek term is perischesis.
contrary to sect A diurnal planet in a nocturnal chart or a nocturnal planet in a diurnal chart is said to be contrary to sect, i.e., contrary to the sect of the chart. The Greek term is para ten hairesin.
co-presence When two planets occupy the same zodiacal sign, they are said to be co-present, regardless of distance. It is similar to the modern concept of conjunction, but without the restriction of orb. The Greek term is suniparousia (from sun-, “together,” + para, “beside” + ousia [eimf], “to be”).
counteraction A planets good condition is undone when its domicile lord is badly situated or when it occupies the domicile or exaltation sign of a planet that is contrary to its own sect. The Greek term is antanalusis, “in­ congruity of position”, which seems to come from anti-, “counter-” + alno, “to wander, be restless”, thus a planet that is “wandering” in a place that is “counter” to its nature, causing it “unease and restlessness”.
curtailed passage A planet is in curtailed passage when it is visible for a certain period of time, but invisible at its rising or setting. The lack of visi-

GLOSSARY 1167 bility at the horizon occurs for the superior planets when they are within 7 ‘/a degrees on either side of the opposition to the Sun. The Greek term is kolobodiexodos, from kolobos, “docked, curtailed, stunted” + diexodos, “pathway, passage, orbit”.
decan (face ) The subdivision of a sign into three equal io° portions, where each decanate is ruled by a different planet. The ruler of the decan influ­ ences any planets occupying that decan. Decans, originally thirty-six fixed stars or sets of stars associated with a divinity, are the indigenous Egyptian contribution to Hellenistic astrology. The deity associated with the decan was called its “face” (the decans as a rulership system are thus known as fac­ es in Medieval astrology). The Greek word for decan is dekanos (from deka, “ten”); the word for face is prosopon.
decennial Modern name given to a timing system used in Hellenistic and
Medieval astrology where the life is divided into equal ten-year, nine-month intervals, each under the rulership of a certain planet that has governance over the life during that period.
declination A planets distance north or south of the equator.
decline Generally, refers to the cadent third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses where planets are “falling away” (apoklima) from the peak of the angles or from the angular houses themselves. Decline can also can refer to the de­ grees rising before the four angles (asc , MC, DSC, IC). See CADENT HOUSE.
decreasing in light When the Moon is waning, from the Full Moon back to the New Moon, its light decreases and it is said to be “diminishing in light”. The Greek expression is legei photi (from lego, “to abate, cease” and phaos “light”.
degree A single portion of a 360° circle used to measure the zodiacal longi­ tude of a planets position along the ecliptic. The Greek word is moira, which means “portion” but also “fate” (with the implication that fate “apportions” destiny).
descending node The point where the plane of the Moon or a planet in its orbital motion crosses the ecliptic from a northerly to a southerly direction.
Also known as the South Node. When referring to the orbit of the Moon, it is also called the South Lunar Node. The Greek term is katabibazd, which means “to go down”.
detriment The condition of a planet that occupies the sign opposite that of its domicile rulership. Generally speaking, a planet in detriment has diffi­ culty bringing forth or sustaining the matters it represents because its basic

1168 GLOSSARY nature is fundamentally contrary to that of the sign. Aquarius is the detri­ ment of the Sun, Capricorn of the Moon, Sagittarius and Pisces of Mercury,
Aries and Scorpio of Venus, Taurus and Libra of Mars, Gemini and Virgo of
Jupiter, and Cancer and Leo of Saturn. The Greek word is enantióma, which literally means “opposition”, but to avoid confusion with the oppositional aspect (diámetros), it has been called “detriment”. An excellent alternative is “antithesis”. Contrast domicile.
diameter The term used for the opposition aspect, in which planets are i8o° (or seven zodiacal signs) apart. The Greek word is diámetros.
dignity A Medieval term for the power that a planet gains by virtue of its rulership (domicile, exaltation, triplicity, term, face) in certain signs or por­ tions of certain signs. The Latin word is dignitas.
direct motion A planet that is moving forward in the natural order of the zodiacal signs, as opposed to retrograde (when a planet appears to move in a backward direction). Sometimes referred to as “additive in numbers (or times)” in the Hellenistic texts.
disjunct See aversion .
dispositor The planet that rules the sign in which a planet is located, adding its influence to how the planet operates. For example, when Venus is in
Cancer, the Moon is the dispositor of Venus since the Moon rules the sign
Cancer. In Hellenistic astrology, the dispositor is referred to as a planets domicile lord. See domicile lord , reception .
diurnal chart A chart in which the Sun is above the horizon, as defined by the Ascendant-Descendant axis.
domicile The zodiacal sign in which a planet resides; its dwelling place. The
Greek term is oikos, literally “house ”, but it is translated as “domicile” to avoid confusion with the houses of a chart, i.e., the twelve places or topics of life (topoi).
domicile lord The planet that rules a zodiac sign, especially one in which another planet resides. A domicile lord is responsible for providing resourc­ es to any planet which resides in its own sign. The Greek term is oikodespotés. The same term is used for the Master of the Nativity, which is one of the rulers of the chart as a whole. This use —the ruler of the chart or nativity as a whole—has been capitalized (Oikodespotés) to distinguish it from the ruler of a sign (oikodespotés)
DOUBLE-BODIED See BI-CORPOREAL.

GLOSSARY 1169 eastern /western These terms are used in two different ways. The first use is relative to the mc-ic axis, where planets are rising in the eastern hemi­ sphere and setting in the western hemisphere. The second use is relative to the Sun, where eastern-rising planets rise before the Sun and western-rising planets rise after the Sun. The terms oriental (Latin matutine) and occi­ dental (Latin vespertine) have also been used (oriental refers both to the eastern hemisphere as well as to a planet rising before the Sun; occidental refers both to the western hemisphere and to a planet rising after the Sun).
The Greek terms heoios and hesperios, literally "morning” and "evening”, are sometimes translated as "eastern” and "western”, or as "oriental” and "occi­ dental”.
ecliptic The apparent path of the Sun as seen from Earth.
ELECTiONAL chart A chart that is deliberately chosen (elected) for the in­ ception of a specific event (such as a surgery, marriage, or business opening) in order to determine an auspicious outcome. The Greek term, katarché, refers to an electional or inceptional chart. See inception .
elements The four fundamental components—fire, air, water, and earth— which composed all terrestrial matter according to ancient natural philoso­ phy. Later in the Hellenistic tradition, the four elements were appended to the triplicity grouping of signs that had previously been associated with the four winds (i.e., the four compass directions). The fire signs are Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius; the air signs are Libra, Aquarius, and Gemini; the water signs are Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces; the earth signs are Capricorn, Taurus, and Virgo. See triplicity.
enclosure When a planet is hemmed in bodily or by the aspect rays of other planets, it is said to be "enclosed”. For a planet to be enclosed, a planet or ray must lie on each side of the enclosed planet without any other planet casting an aspect ray into the intervening space. A planet is said to be maltreated when enclosed by the rays of the malefics, Mars and Saturn. The term used in Medieval astrology is besiegement (Latin iniportunitas, "trouble”, Arabic hasr, "encirclement, confinement, besiegement”), and is considered an un ­ fortunate condition. A planet can also be enclosed by two benefics, in which case it is thought to be protected. The Greek term is emperischesis.
EVENING RISE, EVENING SET See EVENING STAR.
evening star When planets rise over the eastern horizon after the Sun rises, they are said to be "of the evening” or "evening stars” because they are not visible in the western sky until nightfall, after the Sun has set (unless they

GLOSSARY1170 are under the Suns beams and thus invisible). Compare morning star .
evening -star phase Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are in their evening-star phase from their direct station until their heliacal evening set. Mercury and
Venus are in their evening star phase from their first visibility in the west at their evening rise until their heliacal evening set. During this interval, Mer ­ cury and Venus undergo their greatest eastern elongation. All planets are more effective during their morning and evening star phases than during their lying-hidden phase (under the Suns beams) or their acronychal phase.
Compare morning -star phase .
exaltation The condition of a planet in which its matters or significations are raised high, honored, and respected. The Sun is exalted in Aries, the
Moon in Taurus, Mercury in Virgo, Venus in Pisces, Mars in Capricorn, Ju­ piter in Cancer, and Saturn in Libra. The Greek term is hupsoma, from hupsod, “lift high, raise up, elevate, exalt”, hupsosy “height, summit, sublimity”.
face The image of the deity associated with each decan. The Greek term is prosopon. See also decan .
fall The condition of a planet when it is in a zodiacal sign opposite its sign of exaltation. Traditional astrology posits that when a planet is fallen, the mat­ ters that it represents are brought down low, dishonored, and not respected.
The Sun is in its fall in Libra, the Moon in Scorpio, Mercury in Pisces, Venus in Virgo, Mars in Cancer, Jupiter in Capricorn, and Saturn in Aries. The
Greek term is tapeindma, which is sometimes translated as “depression” or “descension”.
familiarity Related to the notion of family, familiarity refers to zodiacal signs that share an affinity of some kind. These affinities include: gender or triplicity; signs sharing the same planetary ruler (such as Taurus and
Libra); planets in signs in which they have some kind of rulership or sect status; or planets in signs of their sect mates (with whom they share friendly relations). These planetary placements were thought to increase the planet s capacity to be effective. The Greek term is oikeidsis.
figural conjunction An applying aspect (in contrast to a bodily conjunc­ tion) by sextile, square, trine, or opposition configuration within 30 for plan­ ets and 130 degrees for the Moon. The Greek term is sunaphe kata schema.
fixed sign See quadruplicity .
flowing away When a faster-moving planet is separating bodily or by as­ pect from a slower-moving planet. It is not altogether clear if the Hellenistic astrologers used an orb of the next whole-integer degree, of one degree, or

GLOSSARY 1171 of three degrees or more. The Greek term is aporrhoia.
Gemini Originally the sidereal constellation that the Greeks called the Twins,
Gemini indicates the tropical sign that spans the third thirty-degree seg ­ ment of the Suns annual path following the Spring Equinox. Its character­ istics are drawn from both its image and seasonal qualities. As the Twins,
Gemini is human, rational, winged, barren, vocal, whole, dual, and free. As a sign it is diurnal, masculine, bi-corporeal, vernal, and airy. It is the do­ micile of Mercury, exalts no planet, the triplicity of Saturn by day and of
Mercury by night. Gemini was envisioned as the shoulders and arms of the cosmos in the thema mundi and corresponds to the shoulders, arms, hands, and fingers of the human body. Depending upon the relationship with the domicile lord, those born under Gemini were described as scholars, trans­ lators, educators, those who are fond of discourse, who work with letters or numbers, who have an aptitude for commerce, or are seekers after mystic lore. The Greek word for Gemini is didunioi, “twins”.
gender A classification of planets and signs as masculine or feminine, ac­ tive or receptive. Events signified by planets occupying masculine signs are more active and thus come about earlier; events signified by planets in fem ­ inine signs are slower and thus occur later. Masculine gender signs are Aries,
Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius, and Aquarius; feminine gender signs are
Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn, and Pisces. Masculine gender planets are the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; feminine gender planets are the Moon and Venus. Mercurys condition determines its gender. This clas­ sification is sometimes referred to as polarity. The Greek terms are arrenikos, “masculine” and thelukos (feminine), which Rhetorius applied to signs and planets; Ptolemy spoke of two primary kinds of nature (phusis); planets and signs thus had masculine or feminine natures (phuseis).
good houses or places Generally speaking, the houses that are config­ ured by whole-sign aspects to the Ascendant (i.e., the first, fourth, fifth, sev­ enth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh houses) are considered to be locations of the more favorable and fortunate topics of life. The third house is sometimes classified with the good houses and sometimes with the bad. See chrex M a - tistikos.
greatest elongation A planet is at its greatest elongation when it reaches its greatest angular distance from the Sun. When viewed from Earth, Mer ­ curys maximum elongation is 28° and Venus ’ maximum elongation is 470.
They appear at their greatest distances above the horizon at their greatest elongations. Mercury and Venus are at their greatest western elongation

1172 GLOSSARY when they are morning stars, as they are west of the Sun. They are at their greatest eastern elongation when they are evening stars, as they are east of the Sun. The value of the greatest elongation (west or east in any particular cycle) is between 18° and 28 o for Mercury, and between 450 and 470 for Ve ­ nus. This value varies because the orbits of the planets are not perfect circles, but elliptical.
heliacal evening set A planets last visibility when setting after the Sun in the western evening sky at approximately 150 of separation from the Sun.
Upon its heliacal evening set, a planet goes “under the Suns beams ” and enters into a period of invisibility known as its “lying-hidden phase”. See evening star , lying -hidden phase , under the beams .
heliacal morning rise A planets first visibility when rising before the
Sun in the eastern morning sky at approximately 150 of separation from the Sun. Upon its heliacal morning rise, the planet emerges from the Suns beams and leaves a period of invisibility known as its “lying-hidden phase”.
See morning star , lying -hidden phase , under the beams .
hexagon The regular six-sided polygon, each side of which is sixty degrees, used to describe the sextile aspect when planets are three signs apart (6o°).
The Greek term is hexágonos.
hour Hours refer to the distinct periods of each day that are ruled by different planets, also known as “planetary hours”. The Greek word is hora.
hour -marker The hour that marks the birth. Specifically, the whole sign that is rising at the hour of birth, the entire first house, as well as the specif­ ic degree of the sign ascending at the moment of birth. The Greek term is
Hdroskopos from hora, "hour”, and skopos, “one who watches”, or “a mark or object upon which one fixes the eye”; the Latin word is Acendens, “rising”, whence English “Ascendant”.
house (place ) The nativity is divided into twelve houses, understood as lo­ cations for the twelve basic topics of life. The Greek term is topos, “place, topic”. It should not be confused with oikos, literally “house ”, but translated as “domicile”, which refers to a planets sign of rulership. The twelve houses are: (1) Ascendant, (2) Gate of Hades, (3), Goddess, (4) Subterranean Place (Under the Earth), (5) Good Fortune, (6) Bad Fortune, (7) Setting, (8) Idle
Place, (9) God, (10) Midheaven, (11) Good Spirit, (12) Bad Spirit.
hurling a ray A backward aspect ray cast by a planet on the left side of an aspect configuration to a planet on the right side of that figure or onto the zodiacal signs preceding it. For example, a planet in Capricorn casts a back­

GLOSSARY 1173 ward square ray to a planet in Libra or onto the zodiacal signs of Scorpio,
Libra, and Virgo. The Greek term is aktinoboled.
hyleg Medieval Latin term for the releaser when it is used to determine lon­ gevity. The Latin term is derived from Persian/Arabic, hilaj, which in turn is a translation of the Greek aphetes “letting go, release”. See releasing .
ic (imum CGiLi) The Latin term imum coeli means the “bottom” or “lowest part” (imum) of the heavens (cceli). The ic degree is also called the anti-cul­ minating point of the Suns daily course, as it is exactly opposite the mc degree (the Suns culmination overhead on any particular day). It marks the intersection of the ecliptic with the local meridian. In quadrant house sys­ tems, the ic is the cusp or beginning of the fourth house, which is similarly called Under the Earth (hupogeion). However, in the whole-sign house sys­ tem, the ic degree can be located in the third, fourth, or fifth houses (and at extreme latitudes, in the second or sixth houses). See angle , midheaven .
inception The beginning of an event, usually used in electional (katarchic) astrology. The Greek term is katarche. See electional chart .
INCONJUNCT See AVERSION.
increasing in light When the Moon is waxing, gaining in light from the
New Moon to the Full Moon. The Greek expression is from auxand, “to increase, strengthen, grow” and phaos “light”.
inferior This term is used in two different contexts. When referring to plan­ etary order in the cosmos, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon are called the inferior planets as they are lower than the Sun in Ptolemaic cosmology, i.e., closer to the Earth. When used in aspect doctrine, inferior refers to a planet positioned on the left side of an aspect configuration, which generally has less power than the planet in the superior position (i.e., a planet on the right). See superior .
intervention (interposition ) When a planet inserts itself, either bodi­ ly or by aspect ray, in the intervening space to prevent an enclosure (emperischesis), containment (perischesis), or the completion of a three-degree aspect of connection (sunaphe) or adherence (kollesis). The Greek term is mesembolesis, “throwing in the middle (or in between)”.
in the heart (cazimi) A planet is in the heart of the Sun when it is within the range of one degree on either side of the Sun (Hellenistic), or seventeen minutes on either side of the Sun (Medieval). The term cazimi, which means “in the heart” (of the Sun) is Arabic, and was adopted by Medieval astrolo­ gers. The Greek term is enkardios (en, “in”, kardios “heart”). For Rhetorius,

U74 GLOSSARY ‘‘stars are said to be in the heart (enkardios) when they travel in company with the Sun, either on the same degree or near or alongside the degree”.
joint-master of the nativity Defined by Porphyry as the bound lord of the Predominator, or in alternative traditions, the domicile lord of the
Ascendant. The role of the Joint-Master of the Nativity is to help the Master as second-in-command of the nativity as a whole. The Joint-Master can also designate, in accordance with its condition and location, the overall favor­ ability or unfavorability of the quality of the life during the first, middle, or later ages of life. The Greek term is Sunoikodespotes. See master .
joy A condition in which a planet rejoices and finds delight when located in a particular house. Mercury has its joy in the first house, the Moon in the third, Venus in the fifth, Mars in the sixth, the Sun in the ninth, Jupiter in the eleventh, and Saturn in the twelfth. When a planet rejoices, it tends to bring about more favorable outcomes relative to both its own significations and the topics of the house in which it rejoices. The Greek word is chara. See also REJOICING CONDITIONS.
jupiter Known as “the star of Zeus ” by the Greeks, Jupiter’s significations fell under the auspices of the supreme leader of the gods. Jupiter is a benefic, di­ urnal sect planet, the domicile lord of Sagittarius and Pisces, exalted in Can ­ cer, and the triplicity lord of the fire signs in night charts. Its nature is warm, moist, and productive of the life force. Jupiter signifies wise persons, priests, and magistrates. It is associated with the begetting of children, friendships, prosperity, wealth, success, good reputation, honors, and justice. Jupiter symbolizes the force that augments, expands, increases, regenerates, and confirms. The “star of Zeus ” (aster tou Dios) was poetically known as Phaethon, “the radiant one ”.
left The planet on the left side of an aspect figure is later in the zodiacal order (up to the point of opposition). In general, it is less powerful than the planet on the right side of the figure, which is earlier in zodiacal order. For exam ­ ple, a planet in Libra, Scorpio, or Sagittarius is on the left side of a planet in
Leo. The Greek term is eudnumos; in Medieval Latin astrology it is called sinister. Compare right.
leo Originally the sidereal constellation that the Greeks called the Lion, Leo indicates the tropical sign that spans the second thirty-degree segment of the Sun ’s annual path following the Summer Solstice. Its characteristics are drawn from both its image and its seasonal qualities. As the Lion, Leo is bes­ tial, quadrupedal, terrestrial, semi-vocal (roaring), barren, free, lewd, and broken. As a sign it is diurnal, masculine, solid, summery, and fiery. It is

GLOSSARY 1175 the domicile of the Sun and exalts no planet, the triplicity of the Sun by day and of Jupiter by night. Leo was envisioned as the heart of the cosmos in the thema mundi and corresponds to the heart, back, and ribs of the human body. Depending upon the relationship with the domicile lord, those born under Leo were described as noble, kingly, well tempered, intellectual, good, just, haters of evil, hating work, inflated with lofty thoughts, imperious, and irascible. The Greek word for Leo is león, “lion.” libra Originally the sidereal constellation that the Greeks called the Scales,
Libra indicates the tropical sign that spans the first thirty-degree segment of the Suns annual path following the Fall Equinox. Its characteristics are drawn from both its image and its seasonal qualities. As the Scales, Libra is human, vocal, good, unprolific, and servile. As a sign it is diurnal, mas ­ culine, equinoctial, autumnal, and airy. It is the domicile of Venus, the ex­ altation of Saturn, the triplicity of Saturn by day and of Mercury by night.
Libra was envisioned as the lower midheaven and buttocks of the cosmos in the thema mundi, and corresponds to the hips and buttocks of the human body. Depending upon the relationship with the domicile lord, those born under Libra were described as noble and just, but malicious and desirous of others’ goods; they were of changing fortune, and were artisans or overseers of measures, weights, and grain supplies. The Greek word for Libra is zugos, “the beam of the balance or scales”.
lights (luminaries ) The Sun and the Moon. The Greek word isphdta.
line of the horizon The axis formed by the Ascendant and Descendant indicating the points of sunrise and sunset on the horizon.
loosing the bond The Moon “loosens or escapes the bond” when it has flowed away and passed beyond the fifteen-degree interval (or in some texts the five-degree interval) of its conjunction or aspect with the Sun. The ex­ pression “loosing the bond” is also used in the timing technique of zodiacal releasing from the Lots of Fortune and Spirit. When the releasing through the zodiacal signs completes a full cycle through the zodiac but has not yet completed its time allotment, it “jumps” across to the opposite sign to continue its releasing. Loosing the bond often marks a transition period in which there is a significant turn in the course of the life trajectory. The
Greek terms are lusts, “loosing, releasing” and sundesntos, “bond of union, that which binds together, fastening”. See releasing .
lord /lady (of a zodiacal sign ) The planet that rules a zodiacal sign, usually the domicile, but also the exaltation, triplicity, or the degrees of a bound sector. The Greek terms are kurios (lord) and kuria (lady).

1176 GLOSSARY lord of the nativity Tlie planet that rules the entire chart based upon specific conditions and positions of authority. It is sometimes associated with the guiding force of the personal daimon, and is distinct from the Mas ­ ter of the Nativity, which determines longevity and in some cases character.
The Greek term is kurios geneseds, from kurios, “lord” + geneseds, “genesis, birth”). Throughout this book, the capitalized form, Kurios (Lord), has been used to distinguish the lord of the nativity from the lord of a sign.
lot Also known as Arabic Part. A mathematical point calculated by taking the distance between two planets, or between a planet and a Lot or house degree, and then projecting this distance as an arc from the Ascendant. Hel­ lenistic and Medieval astrology utilized dozens of Lots, such as the Lot of
Spirit, the Lot of Marriage, the Lot of the Father, and the Lot of Death. The most well-known Lot is the Lot of Fortune. The Greek term is kleros and the
Latin, pa rs.
lot of fortune (tuche ) The special Lot of the Moon. The quality and quantity of good fortune concerning body, health, wealth, and happiness that a person may expect in life. Also known as the Part of Fortune in Medi­ eval and modern astrology. Many traditional astrologers calculate this and other Lots differently in diurnal versus nocturnal charts by taking the arc from the Sun to the Moon in a diurnal chart, or the arc from the Moon to the Sun in a nocturnal chart (in the order of the signs) and projecting this arc from the degree of the Ascendant. The Greek term is kleros tuche.
lot of spirit (daimon ) The special Lot of the Sun which is used in de­ terminations regarding a persons intentional actions in society and pro­ fessionally. In contrast to the Lot of Fortune, it is connected with the soul rather than the body. The Greek term is kleros daimon. The calculations are the reverse of those for the Lot of Fortune. See lot of fortune .
luminary (light) The Sun or the Moon. The Greek word isphota.
LUNAR NODE See ASCENDING NODE and DESCENDING NODE.
lunation phase The phase, or arc of separation, between the Sun and the
Moon.
lying -hidden phase Planets are said to be in the lying-hidden phase when they are under the Suns beams, standardized at 150 before and 150 after the
Sun. Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are no longer considered effective as morning or evening stars during their lying-hidden phase, i.e., the interval between their heliacal evening set and their heliacal morning rise (midpoint con junction with the Sun), except for when they are “in the heart” of the Sun

GLOSSARY 1177
Mercury and Venus are no longer considered effective during the interval between their heliacal evening set and heliacal morning rise (midpoint in­ ferior conjunction with the Sun) and that of their morning set and evening rise (midpoint superior conjunction with the Sun), except when they are “in the heart” of the Sun. The Greek term krupto, “to hide, cover, conceal”, is used by Paulus when speaking of morning or evening disappearance in his chapter on the “phases” (phaseon) of the five planets in relation to the Sun.
malefic A planet that is literally a “doer of bad”, usually ascribed to Mars and Saturn (the lesser malefic and greater malefic respectively). The Greek term is kakopoios (from kakos, “bad, evil”, and poied, “to create, make, do”).
Contrast benefic .
maltreatment Specific aspect relations involving the malefics (Mars or Sat­ urn), plus other conditions such as sign or house placements, that either severely injure a planets ability to bring forth its positive significations, or which bring out its most negative significations. In Medieval terminology, maltreatment is sometimes referred to as “corruption” or “affliction”. The
Greek term is kakosis, from kakos, “bad, evil”.
mars Known to the Greeks as “the star of Ares ”, the significations of Mars came under the auspices of the god of war. A nocturnal sect planet, Mars is malefic, the domicile lord of Aries and Scorpio, exalted in Capricorn, and the triplicity lord of water signs in night charts. Its nature is extremely hot, dry, and destructive of the life force. Mars signifies military personnel, vio­ lence, anger, danger, bloodshed, recklessness, estrangements, and is associ­ ated with sexual intercourse. Mars symbolizes the force that initiates, takes offensive action, cuts, separates, and divides. The Romans saw their god
Mars as a military protector, symbolizing courage and valor. The “star of
Mars ” (aster ton Areos) was poetically known as Puroeides, “the fiery one ”.
master of the nativity A planet that has rulership over the nativity as a whole, often considered to be the most powerful planet in the chart for determining longevity. Offen this is the planet that is the domicile lord or bound lord of the Predominator, but if this does not qualify, other candi­ dates can be chosen. The Greek term is oikodespotes geneseos, literally “do­ micile master of the nativity”. When referring to the ruler of the chart, the term Oikodespotes (Master) has been capitalized to distinguish it from the ruler of a sign (oikodespotes, domicile lord). Compare dO iMICIle lord .
mc (midheaven ) The middle of the heavens refers to both the name of the tenth whole-sign house, as well as the highest culminating point of the Suns daily course across the sky between its rising and setting on the horizon.

1178 GLOSSARY
The mc degree is the intersection of the ecliptic with the local meridian, which may be located in a house other than the tenth when using whole­ sign houses. The Greek word is mesouranema, from niesos, “middle” and ouranos, “sky, heaven”. The Latin is an exact translation: Medium, “middle”,
Cœli, “sky, heaven”.
mercury Known to the Greeks as “the star of Hermes ”, Mercury ’s significa­ tions came under the auspices of the patron god of travelers who journeyed both above and below the Earth. Mercury carried messages between gods and mortals as well as between mortals themselves. He also protected liars and thieves. Mercury as "common ” could be either masculine or feminine, benefic or malefic, and of either the diurnal or nocturnal sect; he is the do­ micile lord of Gemini and Virgo, exalted in Virgo, and the triplicity lord of air signs in night charts. His nature changes quickly, sometimes wet, some ­ times dry. Mercury signifies youth, children, merchants, scribes, scholars, teachers, translators, diviners, and astrologers. He is associated with com­ munication, the intellect, education (including athletics), friendship, com­ merce, money, and accounting. Mercury is the force that travels between the various parts of the whole—informing, communicating, connecting, mediating, and integrating. The "star of Hermes ” (aster tou Hermou) was poetically known as Stilbôn, “the one who gleams, glitters, or glistens”.
MODALITY See QUADRUPLICITY.
moon The Moon was called Selênë by the Greeks, after their Goddess of the
Moon, whose waxing and waning phases regulate the tides, the ripening of vegetative life, and women ’s monthly blood flows. She is the light of the nocturnal sect, the domicile lord of Cancer, exalted in Taurus, and the tri­ plicity lord of the earth signs in night charts. Her nature is slightly warming and moist. The Moon signifies the queen, mother, nurse, the mistress of the household, common people, and travel, especially seafaring. She is associ­ ated with the conception and health of the entire physical body, and is the key planet examined in medical diagnosis. The Moon symbolizes receptivi­ ty, reflection, foresight, and the force of life itself.
morning rise , morning set Relative to the horizon, all planets rise in the east and set in the west on a daily basis. Relative to the Sun, all planets make a heliacal morning rise in the east at the time of their first visibility when they are at 150 of separation from their conjunction with the Sun. In addition,
Mercury and Venus make a morning set at their last visibility when they are at 150 degrees of separation from their approach to the superior conjunction with the Sun. The Greek term for morning rising is heoria anatolë, and for

GLOSSARY 1179 morning setting, heoria dusis. Compare evening star .
morning star When planets rise over the eastern horizon before the Sun rises, they are said to be “of the morning ” or “morning stars” because they are visible in the eastern sky before the Sun rises (unless they are under the
Suns beams and hence invisible). Compare evening star .
morning -star phase Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are in their morning-star phase from their first visibility at their heliacal morning rise until their retrograde station. Mercury and Venus are in their morning-star phase from their first visibility in the east at their heliacal morning rise until their morning set. During this interval, Mercury and Venus undergo their great­ est western elongation. All planets are more effective during their morning and evening-star phases than in their lying-hidden phase (under the Suns beams) or their acronychal phase. Compare evening -star phase .
monomoira A rulership system in which each single degree of the zodiac is given a planetary ruler. The Greek term is mononioira (from monos “single, unique ” + moira, “portion, degree, fate”).
mutual reception See reception .
nadir The lowest point, beneath the Earth, directly opposite the zenith. Tech­ nically, these two points together are referred to as the "pole of the horizon” and should not be exclusively identified with the mc and ic degrees, or with the tenth and fourth houses. See zenith .
nativity A term used in traditional astrology to refer to a birth chart and to the individual’s life. From the Latin natus, “birth”. The native is the person represented by the nativity. The Greek word for nativity is genesis, “begin­ ning, origin, generation”.
neighboring When two planets are in an applying conjunction within three degrees (adherence, kollesis) in the same zodiacal sign and in the same bound. Or, when two planets are in a whole-sign aspect configuration and each occupies the bounds of the same planet. The Greek word is homoresis.
nocturnal chart A chart in which the Sun is below the horizon, defined by the Ascendant-Descendant axis.
NODE See ASCENDING NODE and DESCENDING NODE.
NORTH NODE See ASCENDING NODE.
occidental See eastern /western .
of the evening When planets rise after the Sun has risen, they are of the

118o GLOSSARY evening. In accordance with diurnal motion, they occupy the degrees and zodiacal signs following the Sun (up to the degree of the Suns opposition).
The Greek word for evening is hesperios.
of the morning When planets rise before the Sun, they are of the morn ­ ing. In accordance with diurnal motion, they are located in the degrees and zodiacal signs preceding the Sun (up to the degree of the Suns opposition).
The Greek word for morning is hedios.
oiKODESPOTÉs See master of the nativity.
OPPOSITION See DIAMETER.
orb Hie range of degrees on either side of a planet that demarcate its range of influence. This term is commonly found in discussions of aspects with other planets, as well as proximity to the Sun. Sometimes, orb refers to the extent of a planets light.
oriental See eastern /western .
outcox ME The manifest final result of a planet or house topic based upon its overall condition. The Greek word is apotelesma, which was a popular title for Hellenistic astrology books.
overcoming A planet in the superior position on the right side of a sextile, square, or trine configuration overcomes and impresses its significations upon the planet in the inferior position on the left side of the aspect config­ uration. The Greek term is kathuperterésis.
partile aspect An aspect that is exact to the same whole-integer degree of longitude in each planets respective sign. For example, a sextile aspect between the Moon at o8° Leo and Venus at o8° Gemini is a partile aspect.
passing by When the ray of one planet passes by and beyond another planet.
The suggested range is one degree past, but this is not an absolute distance.
The Greek term is parallagé, “passing beyond”. In context, this term is often used in relation to the opposition aspect.
phase Certain specified angular distances between the Sun and either the
Moon (lunar phases) or the planets (planetary phases). The Greek term is phasis.
phasis A term used by contemporary Hellenistic astrologers to refer to a plan­ ets heliacal rising or setting, standardized as an exact 150 separation from the Sun within seven days before or after the birth, or a planets direct or retrograde station within seven days before or after the birth. It is interpret­

GLOSSARY 1181 ed as an intensification of the planets energy. In an astrological context, the
Greek word phasis means “phase” but also “appearance” (from phainomai, “cause to appear, bring to light”).
pisces Originally the sidereal constellation that the Greeks called the Fish, Pi­ sces refers to the tropical sign that spans the third thirty-degree segment of the Suns annual path following the Winter Solstice. Its characteristics are drawn from both its image and its seasonal qualities. As the Fish, Pisces is bestial, aquatic, fertile, mute, servile, scaly, rough-finned, lewd, and broken.
As a sign it is nocturnal, feminine, bi-corporeal, wintry, and watery. It is the domicile of Jupiter, the exaltation of Venus, the triplicity of Venus by day and of Mars by night. Pisces was envisioned as the feet of the cosmos in the thema mundi and corresponds to the feet in the human body. Depending upon the relationship with the domicile lord, those born under Pisces were described as unstable, unreliable, ever-changing, of two-minds, alternating in good and bad fortune, erotic, licentious, sociable, popular, wandering, or practicing waterside trades. The Greek word for Pisces is ichthues, “fishes”.
pivot See angle , angular house . The Greek word is kentron and the Lat­ in, cardine.
PLACE SEE HOUSE.
planet The only planets used in traditional astrology were the Sun, Moon,
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, i.e., the only ones visible in the sky until the invention of the telescope in the sixteenth century. In the
Hellenistic texts, the Greek word most often used to indicate a planet is aster, “star”. Specifically, the texts refer to each planet as the “star” of one of their gods or goddesses, such as “star of Hermes ”, the “star of Aphro­ dite’, etc. Because aster was used to refer to all the other stars in the sky as well, another word, planètes, was used to distinguish the “wandering” stars from the “fixed” stars. Here, “wandering” (from planaô, “to wander”) refers to the paths of those “stars” (i.e., planets) that move in secondary zodiacal direction—forward and backward, faster and slower, above and below the ecliptic—deviating from the uniform primary motion of the fixed stars.
planetary condition The evaluation of a planet according to sect, sign, house, aspect, and phase. The condition of a planet determines how effec­ tive it is in bringing about its significations, and to what extent the outcome of its matters will be favorable or unfavorable.
planetary node See ascending node and descending node .
planetary periods Specified lengths of time, often used in timing proce­

1182 GLOSSARY dures, at which the significations of a planet are activated. The least or minor years are derived from a planet’s synodic recurrence cycle with the Sun; the major or greater years are derived from the total number of degrees a planet rules in the bound division of the zodiac; the mean years are an average of the minor and greater. The Greek term is aster periodos.
post-ascension Hie four succedent houses (second, fifth, eighth, eleventh) that rise (ascend) after the angular houses. The Greek term is epanaphora.
pre -ascension The four declining cadent houses (third, sixth, ninth, twelfth) that rise (ascend) before the angular houses. The Greek term is proanaphora.
precession Due to the gyrating motion resulting from the ellipsoid shape of the Earth, the intersection of the vernal equinox point and the celestial equator drifts backward through the zodiacal signs at a rate of approximate­ ly fifty seconds per year, or one degree every 72 years, making a complete cycle in 25,695 years. In recent literature, the precession of the equinoxes has been placed in relation to historical ages in popular culture, such as the “Age of Aquarius ”.
predominator The planet or point in the nativity that is the source of the natives vital life force. It is generally the Sun or Moon, defaulting to the
Ascendant or occasionally to the Midheaven. A derivative of the lights (Lot of Fortune, Lot of Spirit, Prenatal Lunation) or another authoritative planet can also assume this role. Used in length-of-life techniques and in the deter­ mination of the Master of the Nativity. The Greek word is Epikratetbr.
prenatal lunation The New Moon or Full Moon preceding the birth. The degree of this lunation remains a sensitive point throughout the life. The
Greek terminology isprogenomene suzugia sunodike (Prenatal New Moon), and progenomene suzugia panseleniake (Prenatal Full Moon) (from proge­ nomene, “prenatal”, suzugia “syzygy, conjunction, union”, sunodos, “assem ­ bly”, and panselenos, “Full Moon ”).
primary directions A symbolic timing system used to investigate future events in which planets or sensitive points are moved forward according to the direction of diurnal motion to encounter other planets, exact aspects to other planets, or angles. It is based on the measure of right ascension, i.e., the amount of time it takes for one degree to pass across the Midheaven.
primary motion Also called diurnal motion. When standing in the north­ ern hemisphere and looking south—which is the orientation of looking at an astrological chart—diurnal motion is the east-to-west, clockwise move­ ment of a planet rising over the Ascendant, culminating at the Midheaven,

GLOSSARY 1183 setting over the Descendant, and sinking towards the anti-culmination or ic. It is contrasted with secondary motion, which is the west-to-east, coun­ terclockwise motion of the planets through the zodiacal signs in the natural order of the zodiac.
PROFECTiONS A symbolic timing procedure in which each sign is individual­ ly activated, in zodiacal order, at a fixed rate. Annual profections move one sign per year; monthly profections move one sign per month; daily profec­ tions move one sign every 2 */2 days. The matters of the house occupied by the profected sign are emphasized for that period of time, and the planet that rules the profected sign (the time lord) influences the outcome of the houses matters. The time lord governs the life for the duration of the profection (e.g., in annual profections, the time lord will actively govern for a year).
During that time, it has the opportunity to bring about its significations as indicated in the natal chart. The term profection comes from Latin profectiô, “departure, journey ”, from the verb prôficiô, “to advance”. There was no specific term in Greek. Ptolemy spoke about the yearly, monthly and daily chronokratôrs, while Paulus spoke of the nativity “spinning out” years, an expression which comes from the verb diagô, “carry across, draw through, spend or pass (time), spin out, protract, continue”. See time lord .
progressions A symbolic timing procedure of directions used in both tra­ ditional and modern astrology. In secondary progressions, the positions of the planets and angles are moved forward from the natal positions in sec­ ondary zodiacal direction at the rate of one day for a year. The progressed planets and angles are then compared to the natal positions (some astrolo­ gers use transits to the progressed positions of the natal planets). In tertiary progressions, planets and angles are moved forward at the rate of one day for a month, and are then compared to the natal positions. Valens describes this as a timing technique for nativities, but does not give it a name. It was not used much in Hellenistic astrology.
quadrant houses Quadrant houses structure the zodiacal wheel by divi­ ding the space between the horizon and the meridian in different ways.
Each house can contain more or less than thirty degrees. Some houses span partial degrees of one zodiacal sign, some span the partial degrees of two zodiacal signs, and others contain degrees of three zodiacal signs. Quad ­ rant house systems include Porphyry, Alcabitius, Placidus, Regiomontanus,
Campanus, and Koch. Quadrant houses are contrasted with whole-sign houses, in which each house sector is exactly 30° and in perfect alignment with a single zodiacal sign.

